Kabeh Vaziri Soyeb Barot Gartner agentic AI workforce CIO. Kabeh Vaziri Soyeb Barot Gartner agentic AI workforce CIO. Hello and welcome to this Gartner webinar: How to create a workforce that can keep up with AI. Your task is driving a stronger performance on your organization's mission-critical priorities. To do that, you need trusted guidance that provides clarity, not just information. At Gartner, we deliver that clarity by combining forward-looking insights from our 2,400 experts with rigorous proprietary research methodologies. Our perspective is uniquely informed by our hands-on work with 500-10,000 client interactions across every major function, geography, industry, and sector. We don't just provide the business and technology insights. We work with you to apply them, equipping your team with practical tools and expert guidance to achieve your goals. So whether you're new to Gartner or one of our existing clients, today you'll get actionable objective insights rooted in human intelligence to help you move forward with confidence. I'm Sneha Bhar, your moderator for this session. Before we get started, I have a few tips to help enhance your webinar experience. Here are our rules of engagement for watching this session. We'll pause for a moment to give you time to review them. Around the video player, you'll find a variety of ways to interact with the session. We encourage you to participate by adding in your questions and thoughts in the Ask the Speaker box. You can either submit a question anonymously, or if you choose, your name, title, and company can be visible along with your question. Navigate to the bottom of the page to download additional resources. And throughout the program, you can rate the session and share feedback. To submit your rating, locate the rate session link below the player. A box will open for you to select one to five hearts. Please note that five hearts is the top rating. Tell your feedback on the insights provided in the leave further feedback box and click send. This webinar is being recorded. You can watch this presentation again and find more great insights on demand at gardner.com/webinars. Now I'd like to welcome Gartner Managing Vice President Kabeh Vaziri and Distinguished Vice President Analyst Soeb Barot. Kabeh and Soeb, thanks for joining us today. And now I'll turn it over to you. Thank you, Sneha. Pleasure to be here. And hi everyone on the line. This is an important topic, and it's a topic that Soeb and I have put our heart into it. You know, for all of the past year. I'm very happy to be bringing this to you. Let's move to the next page, Sneha. Actually, I can do that. So let me show you some of the information on this topic that I think you know is really relevant. I really like by starting with data. After all, you know we have our own unique proprietary data, and I think it has a great story. There is a lot of AI everywhere, right? You know, some organizations are sprinkling it on the workflows, and some places, you know, we are seeing more methodical approaches. But regardless, it's really feeling like it's everywhere. If you start from the left, you can see that 24% of the organizations have scaled AI in multiple business units. And that we are expecting that the proportion of the work done by AI agents to really, you know, significantly increase over the next three years. All of this is really causing AI to get to the core of the work, right? So a lot of us within our daily jobs might feel like, you know, there are agents that might help us with, you know, assisting or querying or analyzing simple tasks. At the same time, if you look at the middle, all of this is causing two things. So as as all of that is happening, there are backgrounds that are more unique backgrounds that are more combined, synthesized backgrounds that are becoming more and more attractive to CIOs and executives across the board, right? So it's no longer this one person with this unique expertise with this one domain knowledge. It's a person who's combining multiple things. So a lot of organizations are finding it hard to figure out, you know, what talent they need and who to bring in, even if there are a lot of talented people inside. So that understanding is hard. And also because AI is taking over some of the routine tasks, analyzing, etc. The premium on innovation and problem-solving skills, or is increasing, right? So when in our recent survey of the CIOs and top executive leaders, we found that the top two critical skills for IT staff was actually innovation and problem-solving. If you don't have them, that might create a roadblock in terms of you know realizing your outcomes. And then on the right side, the talent pipeline is broken. Well, you know, more than half of enterprises are focusing on augmenting, not replacing, employees. And forty percent of enterprises have no strategy. Well, forty percent have a strategy in place for skills atrophy, but that means sixty percent don't, right? And as you know, if you don't use a skill, you might just lose it. And so this is really important as AI taking is taking over tasks and you know critical capabilities. You know how do we think about ourselves as humans and our powers and you know superpowers. I want to orient you to another data point here because I know that jobs are all over the news and everyone thinks about it. You know, either for your organizations or even I think deeply personal, right? Like you know, everyone I think feels um some of that anxiety. So across 2025, we looked at 1.4 million AI layoff data points. We analyzed them for AI, and we found that only less than 1% of them are about AI productivity. There are a lot of reasons for layoffs, of course, but you know AI productivity was not the one that you know drove the number to be as high as 1.4 million. A lot of what's happening is that AI is not causing necessarily a substitution for humans—not a layoff story, but a lot of chaos, right? And by chaos I mean it's not necessarily just job loss, it's also a lot of rapid evolution of the existing jobs. It's not that some people will not lose their jobs, but it's also that a lot of people will see their jobs changing. We might see new jobs created and we will see a lot of jobs morphing. And so this chaos is where we will need to pay attention and you know have this conversation today. And the workforce conversation, which is you know if you think about AI impact on workforce chaos that we were just talking about, that's not just one conversation, it's really three conversations. And and it's helpful to put it as three conversations because I think part of what makes it really difficult is that you will have one conversation, but the person that you're speaking with, they might be having the other conversation with you, right. So starting from the left, the first conversation around AI, the executive conversation is around capacity reallocation. Is it helping us do more of what matters? Or is it just making us busier? Across the board, I speak with a lot of organizations, and I can tell you the sentiment is: our people feel so busy, but we can't really tell what they're busy with. And you know why is it that we feel like we are increasing personal productivity, but everyone feels so busy, right? Like so you know yes AI is creating some capacity in there, but what are we doing with it? Are we able to convert it to something that you know is is different? The emotional adaptation is real, right? Because as I was just talking about that this chaos. Creates a roller coaster for everyone, you know, from everyone on the ground all the way to the penthouse of the organization and the executives personally, right? So the idea would be: Will AI be the force that is going to fracture the organization, or is it going to be mobilizing it? And work redesign. Is about, can we create new value, that was not there before? Will AI allow us to do something that we could not do before? Could we become something that we could not be before? Right. And the thing is, these three are very interdependent. If you look at the gray boxes underneath, they all depend on each other. If you don't have people who are emotionally engaged, they're not going to be creating capacity for you. If you can't create capacity, you are not going to be able to do the work redesign. Right, and so they are all very interdependent, which actually adds to the complexity of having this workforce conversation and you know what happens as a result of AI. And when you think of these as interdependent conversations, I think. Across the board, what I've observed is that everyone's first instinct is to focus on capacity as a first measurable win, because it's very easy to say, "We put AI here, we are going to save minutes and hours on this particular job." It's a check the box, right? But your first visible win should be with your people, right? Bringing them along on that journey with you, so that they feel ownership of you know what's going to happen. They are part of that experimentation and innovation with you, and that instead of worrying about their jobs, they are actually excited to become and like have the jobs of tomorrow and you know do the kinds of things that you could not do before. Once you convert those first two to work redesign and intentional job redesign, that's actually what's going to be the most durable way of thinking about all of this, right? So all three are important. You will probably feel the pressure at different points in terms of your workforce planning journey, but you know what you really want is to be very intentional about you know what is it that you're trying to win at what point and you know what are you going to do with that. Now let's let's double click on capacity reallocation. And as usual, I think with with all of our insights, we try to make them as actionable as possible, right? And so for the purposes of this conversation, Soeb and I thought, well, what's the best way of talking about how to create capacity? Than to talk about a specific job, right? Like as a case in point. And then we'll pull up and have the conversations and insights for you at the workforce level, of course. But we thought that actually it's much easier and much more tangible if we talk about a specific job. At Gartner, we've actually done the analysis for all of the jobs on the left and more. So you know we have some 20 plus jobs in IT that we've analyzed. We've started doing some business jobs across HR and other functions. And the way that we thought about a job on the right side is actually pretty much a real-world view of the job, because as you all know, jobs can be notoriously different at different organizations, right? You can have the same job with different job descriptions to different companies. You have years of experience. You have even the same job within the same company. It could be a software engineer who's sitting in internal IT or a software engineer who's sitting on the trading floor of the business, right? So the way that we thought of creating a shared language around it was a capability. This is important because this is going to set the stage for for the rest of how you are going to be looking at a particular job. So let me take my time and explain what I mean. The core capabilities of the job are the capabilities, the set of skills and tasks that are always owned by this job, no matter what. So it doesn't matter whether you have 10 years of experience or 15 or 3. It doesn't matter where you sit or the type of an organization. At most organizations, if you are a software engineer, you own these particular skills. For example, if you are a data scientist, this is always a part of your job. The contextual capabilities would be the set of capabilities that depend on the conditions, right? So that the way that your team is set up, how much trust you personally have, and like you know how senior you might be, the business context. So those are those set of capabilities. So maybe you own them, maybe you don't own them. And regardless of our jobs, all of us contribute to a set of shared capabilities for the organization, right? So and and those shared set of capabilities would be different for different jobs. But for any set of any job that we analyze, we actually look at how this job will contribute to shared capabilities and shared outcomes. Now with that, let me pass it on to Soyeb, who's gonna take you through the same journey for data scientists. Kabeh, thank you so much, and it's been an absolute pleasure as well as a fantastic collaborating with you and the team trying to put together the impact on the roles and how we see these roles being impacted or redesigned as part of the future of IT twenty thirty. So as organizations try and actually look into that, they're looking at what that particular org structure is going to look like, how the roles are going to evolve, and what is it that they can do in order to upscale their talent. Reorganize their teams and also create pathways as part of what that new operating model is going to look like in twenty thirty. Now, as you can compare, as you can mention for the purposes of this particular recognition, we are going to focus on the data scientist role, because when we take a look at this, it provides a framework or a blueprint. Because if we take a look at it, this pattern isn't unique, and it can be much more of a repeatable process across the enterprise for all of the different other roles that we that we've already gone through the analysis as well. This is what it's come out. Now, if we were to focus specifically on the role of the data scientist, the important insights over here is more around jobs very significantly based on context as well. Things around organization structure, technical maturity, domain knowledge, and all shape how those particular capabilities evolve. Built from the core capabilities around problem framing to data preparation and hypothesis testing, which is what is core to and fundamental to the job of a data scientist, to having that particular contextual awareness of what particular kind of features are really important for a given model in a domain. It would be very different for an insurance organization versus a supply chain. So having that particular contextual awareness of what particular features really matter as part of building those particular models is something that is really important. In addition, how do you go about that? The deployment strategy, so the model deployment piece, the ethics and the responsible AI piece, but also a shared set of capabilities which is much more around the research and the innovation, the tooling evaluation itself. But more importantly, how do you actually do that cross-functional collaboration? Because Gone are the days when you know a data scientist would just go across and build a model and then say, "Okay, I'm going to just throw it off the fence and then that's my engineering team that needs to take care of." No, you need to work in collaboration to be able to go across and do that. And these are some of the things that these capabilities, which are core to that of a data scientist. This also means that when you're trying to redesign that little job, it's not one size fits all. It must be contextually and capability driven, and this is where the workflow comes across. We can't redesign the job of a data scientist. There's already a debate or an argument being said that data scientist was like one of the most coolest jobs back in 2015, 2018 with the rise of machine learning and hyper around it. It still is, but do we see data scientists kind of moving a lot more towards becoming AI engineers or AI architects, or maybe model orchestrators in the future? But you can't completely redesign that without taking into consideration what does that particular workflow of the human responsibilities look like within the data science or machine learning or AI practice within your organization. You have to take into consideration where the human elements come in, where it's much more the role is much more static, disconnected assistant, and where AI can actually help in try and augment it, or embedded more as an enabler where AI agents or suggest that particular code as well as even the algorithms from a visualization perspective, which would help data scientists move from a story telling perspective. Some might actually bucket this and saying that's a much more of a cautious approach or a very AI cautious approach in terms of the redesigning of that job. The second part is where there could be certain task-specific automation, where data scientists oversee interpret those critical results and then guide those critical problem framing and the model choices. But agentic tools can autonomously execute a set of well-designed tasks along with those critical features that they need to engineer as part of training the models, building the LLMs, or even the deploying of fine-tuned models of small language models out of there. And that's where the operational collaboration comes in as well, because it goes spans everything from taking into consideration the data ingestion part, but also monitoring the model once it's deployed in production to make sure that it's still working within the expected thresholds and there is not a significant amount of model drift, and then surfacing those insights as well. Or else you could go completely AI-first, where you have a series of interoperable agents coordinating across multiple platforms, and the data scientists provide much more of that particular high-level oversight, set those particular ethical guardrails, and steer that particular innovation, and really push the boundaries when it comes to thinking outside the box, where most of those particular orchestration components get automated using AI. It's it's kind of like as AI matures, it takes over more of that physical execution, and then humans move toward judgment, orchestration, and then strategy. And this shift is really critical because we are thinking about not eliminating the work, we are changing who does what as part of that bigger process. Now, use a particular heat map. This heat map, in a way, kind of like reflects where AI affects different capabilities, depending on those particular workflows. Some tasks become highly automatable, others remain deeply human-centric. But here's the mistake that most organizations make. They're stopping at automation, of looking at AI just as an automation tool. And if you think about it that way, if we only shrink the jobs based on that, we definitely get efficiency, but not growth, because that's where the human centric piece comes across. And the biggest opportunity that we have is expanding the typical human work into higher value areas, to what AI kind of takes over. Now, with that, Kabeh, I'll pass it on back to you in terms of highlighting how how we redistribute that particular capacity. Absolutely, and I want to remind everyone on the line that any place where you see data scientist on the page, we have done the analysis for you know 20 some jobs in IT and some jobs on the business side as well. So definitely take advantage of that. Looking at that heat map that Soyeb Barot is showing you, it's easy to think that you know okay so you know the colors are going from you know dark blue to light you know lighter colors and therefore you know a lot of it is going gonna go to AI. There is a lot of, you know, the subtle interplay in the background, right? I want to orient you to to this page, which is think about the X axis being time, a factor of time. You know, you go from early state of automation to you know what your new steady state, the desired state might be, like let's say in your S, you know whether you want to be AI first. Um, at L four L five or maybe you you you you stay somewhere in the middle. Um, and so three things are happening, right? So the dark dot the the dark dotted line is the humans doing less from the jobs that they have today, and that might happen because AI can do more and more of the jobs that we have today. Again, this is not um a future looking. Page necessarily, right? Like so, this is of the job descriptions of the capabilities that we had today. You know, how might the relationship, the proportion of the job that used to be done by humans, you know, go to AI, right? So at some level, you have AI doing more of the job. Humans doing less of the job, and that differential could be the capacity that you're creating. However, a lot of organizations are reporting that as all of that is happening, there is also a surge of unplanned work. Some of it, for example, could be you know frictions on handoffs and you know people not knowing where to go. Some of it is, frankly, AI slop that you know gets created. But also a really really important part of this is as you are changing the workflows, a lot of organizations start changing workflows from a place of elimination. Right? You know how do we remove tasks? How do we remove handoffs? You know how do we resequence things? And when that happens, you are putting a lot of faith in the escalation process. And I'll tell you what I heard from a CIO just last week. They said, "You know, we've done all these productivity improvements. It takes only one escalation to wipe out you know a whole bunch of benefits that we thought we had harvested from AI." That's this unplanned work, and it's not something that you know at least easily measurable in the beginning. And so, the fragile capacity that you think you might have created because you know AI is doing more and humans are doing less of the existing jobs, there is also this unplanned work that happens. And what I want to, I guess, what I want you to take away from this page is that the slope of the three graphs in here. That's entirely up to you as you're developing AI, as you're thinking about how to use it, who to give it to, the speed by which all of this is happening, the relationship of the three signals with each other. That's a design decision, right? So you know depending on how you organize these lines, how the lines look like for a particular job, a particular function. You'll see different relationships between these three signals of capacity, and there is that messy middle. Where capacity can feel very fragile, people feel busy, but it's not necessarily good busy, right? And like the busyness, a lot of it comes from the extra unplanned work that we didn't know, and also maybe we don't even find valuable, right? So so that's that's the three signals for capacity that I wanted to take in mind. Across the rest of this webinar, we're going to add more signals into it. So we'll go through emotional adaptation, we'll go through work redesign, and then the picture starts, you know, forming and building on to each other. Let me actually talk to you about the emotional adaptation a little bit, putting the human in the picture, right? So as all of that is happening, AI does more, humans do less. You know, there is the on-plant surge. There is a real person. There is this data scientist that we just talked about who's going through a roller coaster of emotions. They probably started with. You know, good faith, curiosity, caution. This sounds amazing. It helps me dig up, you know, sketches and diagrams and let me figure out what I can do with it. Then this person probably experiences increased productivity, some pride, right? Like the kind of a thing that used to take me this long, it's taking me less time. But also a little bit of a fear of missing out because everybody else seems to be getting more out of it. What am I doing wrong? Like so, it's a little bit of a mixed bag of emotions in there. And from there, you start thinking about, well, this AI thing sounds really good. It's actually getting really good. But if it can do this part of my job really well, what happens to the rest of my job? Right? So you know, fluid boundaries, blurry boundaries, concern for future—that's a real thing. And then at some point there is a new identity, new steady state that some will make it, some might not make it. You know, some of it depends on the kind of a person that you are and your aspirations. You know, does this new way of working, new type of a job, is that useful or not? And some of it is skills, right? So you know, and both of those things have to come together so that you know one would make it from early days of automation to new identity. And the way that I would show that to you on that same graph that we just looked at is, it almost looks like a line that has a dip in the middle, right? So you know you start happy and you know wanting to go ahead and like wanting to try this new thing. Reality kind of kicks in in that messy middle, where you start thinking about well if it can't do this part of my job, well can it do all of my job? The thing that I want you to think about is that it's not a given that this emotional adaptation line is going to go back up. It is real that there will be some job loss for some jobs and for some people, it will go down. But it is up to the executives to bring it back up, and I'm going to repeat this again: not just for important jobs, but also for people who have the ability to learn and on learn and reinvent themselves. Right, so it's not just about the single job that might go away. You want to think about this, you know, from a job perspective, but also the people that we have that are really valuable to us. And you know, Soyeb will go a little bit more into this as well. But but we definitely think that there there is like the two of those angles, and it is up to um up to us to make that decision. Again, like you know, we have agency around how we want to um look at these signals and how we want to interpret them. Um, and let me take you through this one more page, and then I'll pass it off to Soyeb. But um, as you are thinking about this data scientist in the context of the job that is changing, you know that heat map a lot of it is going to AI. Um, as Soyeb was saying, you know, uh, there might be different set of non technical skills that are becoming even more important now, right? Or or or not completely technical skills. We wanted to take a look at how the team element of all of this might look like, right? So the team elements would be who's doing the work, how they're doing the work, and what is the thing that needs to be done, right? So for who's doing the work, like you know think of it as um. You know these data scientists are becoming even more domain experts. You know they are bringing business acumen into the work that they are doing. They are doing a lot more translation. They are shifting fluidly between the different boundaries, different teams, and you know making outcome oriented decisions and you know orienting everyone through the the job that needs to be done. The teams are smaller. They're multidisciplinary. You can think of it as you know they come together to fix a business problem and then they dispatch. A lot of what used to be repetitive work, repetitive analysis, you know data science tasks. Can go to AI, which means that there will be more capacity for a single data scientist to supervise, guide, and refine models, and focus on you know complex creative ethical challenges. But that also means that this this has to be the person that enjoys that type of work. And in terms of the jobs to be done, well strategic AI leadership, domain integrated analysis, those are really the two that you know we see in terms of you know how the job itself might be evolving. But Soyeb I'm sure has a lot more insightful you know double clicks on this that he can give you. So. Kabeh, thank you so much. And one key important thing that you kind of mentioned, which I want to just reemphasize, is this particular part of: you have to take the individual into consideration who are willing to unlearn, learn, and reinvent themselves. I think that's so critical because you don't want. To lose as part of that particular atrophy piece, you don't want to lose that particular domain expertise, that institutional knowledge. And you want to focus on the talent and the group of individuals who are ready to, you know, be agile and ready to learn something new and completely reinvent themselves as part of what the future of in the agentic era or the AI era looks like. So, just double-clicking on this particular part of specifically for the data scientist, as you very rightly pointed out, the role evolves into becoming a lot more hybrid. The data scientist job kind of evolves to becoming much more strategic, domain specific, going beyond just being you know understanding the math and the algorithm more from a technical execution to becoming much more strategic. But also even advisory in terms of what kind of patterns do they see and what kind of solutions can help really drive innovation as well as new opportunities to scale that bigger business. So in a way, the data scientists will need to kind of blend analytical capabilities alongside developing that particular business acumen, but also think about it much more from a product-centric perspective as they build or partner with business alongside the rest of the technology groups as well. I mean, we are already seeing the data scientists' roles evolve. To becoming much more AI business partners or product strategists in terms of building those particular products in the form of agents these particular days, but then also becoming domain AI leaders within those particular industries as well. And that's where the most valuable talent is around the part where you are able to actually combine the technical skills, but also bring in the business acumen, and alongside the right AI judgment that would be required as well for these particular roles. Now, this brings us to a very interesting graphic, which, to be very honest, raises a lot of questions. And people try and you know peel the onion, as I like to call it, and want to take a look at each of those peel layers very closely and examine those peel layers very closely. Now let me just, you know, set the stage a little bit. On the left, what you have are risky skills for atrophy as well as acceptable skills for atrophy, and on the right, you have skills that are very foundational, enduring, but also the new emerging skills as part of the role for data scientists. And it was very interesting for us to go through this bigger exercise when we explored other roles as well as part of that evolution. Now, if you take a look at it, the human foundation piece, which is where the analytical curiosity, the ethical reasoning part, having that business acumen, the storytelling of that particular data, is something that is core foundational to that of the data scientists. A few other enduring skills are much more around the hypothesis formulation, the model selection, knowing which particular models would work best, what are those particular feature variables to be taken into consideration, how do you do experimentation with some designs, and then how do you extend that particular experimentation and bring it into your first MVP or scale these particular models as well. But also the part of like, what are some of those new and emerging skills with AI agents? The governance, the responsible AI governance of it. How do you how do you integrate this cross functionally across the various applications, and this is where the next generation skills required by data scientists would be to better understand about multi agent architectures. How do you design those? What kind of levels of autonomy or semi autonomous workflows that you can create based on that. Understanding where those particular business opportunities would be, which is where you identify and say, "What particular components do I kind of containerize and build an agent around, which can be used across multiple use cases?" Whereas, say, trying to build just one monolithic model as part of it. But as part of this, there is Kabeh highlighted that there is this risk of losing certain skills because now you're leaning a lot more on AI to help with. Like, do I now need to not remember spellings anymore because it will auto correct when I'm typing my emails? Now, is that a skill which is risky for me to lose versus an acceptable one? And that's where for a data scientist, it's more about. The risky skills that they want to make sure that they safeguard is around the data interpretation part, the storytelling because that's core that's human that that's human foundation of what they bring in, the model validation whether it's the right model or not to be able to challenge and say that AI can't provide the right model and the analysis, and be able to break down that analysis. But certain skills. Could be acceptable, in things like the routine data cleaning part. I've had data scientists in my team that spend close to about 30% of their time just data preparation. If that can be automated by AI, I'm more than happy for my data scientists to not understand fundamentals of data integration, right? But that's a skill that they can lose. Standardization of statistical analysis or basic visualization generation. Where should I create a Bayesian graph or a Bayesian plot or should I create a pie chart? Because I'm now speaking with sales and sales will not understand Bayesian plots, but for them it will be much more, you know bar charts or line graphs. Those particular things, it's okay if the data scientists are losing those skills. But there are a few ones that you want to make sure that they kind of like hold on to. And this brings us to this particular part of how do you then redesign that workforce. And this is where the third battle comes in. The third battle is more about how do you go about redesigning that workforce. Now, once AI frees that particular capacity, we need to identify what or define what humans do next. And this cannot be about oh let's address all of that kind of backlog that's been sitting there for the past three years, or which we've not been able to address. But it should be something that is new, inspiring, value creating for the business, and that's where we need to kind of fly, move in. The way to look at that is, how do we break it down? Let's break it down in an analytical fashion. Right? What are some of the things that are routine? That AI will automate, or we should leverage AI to automate coordination like handoff, like handoff that need to happen between the the various systems. Now AI can definitely help accelerate it, right? But sense making like analyzing it as well as looking for opportunities from an innovation perspective. And that's where you know AI can help bolster humans, taking that particular idea and then formulating it even more. But then more important is the connections, building those particular relationships, having that particular deeper understanding of the business in the industry. That AI will multiply. And you could use this as a way to kind of see as to how the work gets impacted. The human work kind of like falls into these categories that we listed out. But AI could automate most of those particular routine, or enhancing that particular coordination, or support that particular sense making. But this framework can really help redesign what that particular feature of your CIO. Now. In order to bring that into perspective from a data scientist perspective, here's what it would look like. You have the AI assisted development norm, which is where AI driven tools can automate data exploration, identifying of feature variables, and the feature engineering part. And also in most cases, which we've seen with auto ML tools, about model selection, where I don't even need to know which particular model will be best, the system actually identifies it. So that's where that assisted automated piece comes across. But also around the part of like, where do you, you know, the ownership boundaries kind of blur, on data scientists increasingly measured by business outcomes more than the kind of models that they actually create. It's not just about the accuracy of the model itself, but the impact that you have. I've been in discussions where I've had a data scientist defending and saying, "My the models providing ninety percent and ninety eight percent accuracy," but the business sitting over there and saying, "Oh, but that's not helped with customer attrition," or move that particular needle by even five percent or two percent, which is what they were expecting. So you could have a really good. Model, but if it doesn't have that particular business outcome or business impact, you could have one of the best models with the highest amount of accuracy, but it's not really helping move that particular dial when it comes to customer retention or growth. But it also kind of moves from shifting towards more becoming product centric outcomes as well. Collaborating with the various patterns or different business units, building that particular platform from a resiliency perspective that can be leveraged across various lines of business within the organization. But more importantly, the ability to be able to quickly do prototypes, iterate, and then go out of that. I've seen organizations where they would say that their data scientists were able to prototype something in a matter of over a weekend, and they would have a model ready by Monday. But then it takes them almost about three months to get that particular model into production and integrated within their production environment as part of that workflow. So those are where these particular roles and the collaboration becomes quite important as part of it as well. Now, moving along, one of the things that we need to think about is. Is this much more specific to the data scientist itself, or what does that particular impact really look at, for all of the roles across DNA? So let's zoom out a bit and see as to how would you go about redesigning that particular workforce, when the AI future state is unknown. Based on our analysis, this is what the data analytics IT 2030 impact looks like. What particular you know how do you how do you make data available, or govern the data much better? Engineer that particular data, predict and optimize it, enable the value, and decide and act on that particular data. What are those particular levels or the percentage of FTS that are going to be impacted? Areas where we are going to see an increase in the headcount. Being stable, and requiring significant amount of rescaling, that would be there. But I want everybody to take a step back a little bit and just observe this. If you take a look at it, this was not specific to the role of a data scientist, a data engineer, a data product manager. None of those roles that we identify within DNI, but it is focused on how does the workflow actually change. It's more about learning how do you make data available, how do you engineer data better, or deliver it in the form of probably data products in a combination of a fabric and a mesh, or how do you make sure that you are enabling value by building models on top of those bigger data products that make it much more easier to derive insights. And the roles, as we discussed, and Kabeh mentioned also, the roles could shift and change. The responsibilities in the workflow is where you need to tie that down. So. Let's take a look at what does that IT workforce look like, and especially more from a journey perspective, for the individual roles. So if we take a look at, and I want to frame it in this particular. In this particular framework of saying, with these particular jobs that are there for the data foundation, we saw that particular onion with the human foundation piece. What roles are core and portable? But then, what does that particular future archetype actually look like? Now, with that being said, if we take a look at what that particular evolution for a data scientist looks like, the data scientist, if they envision themselves. Or if you are redesigning that particular workforce for your data scientists to becoming much more like platform builders, some of the core capabilities that would be really required as part of becoming platform builders would be having a deeper understanding of agent orchestration. Having a deeper understanding of AI engineering, or at least the foundational aspects of AI engineering from a model ops perspective, or Gen AI ops, or even agent dev ops, as part of it. But in addition, the portable shared capabilities around understanding of prompt engineering, the cross-domain integration between various applications that are there as part of it. But also, what's going to be unique to the platform builders role is a deeper understanding of AI infrastructure. The understanding of how do you do APIs and microservices management, DevOps and CI/CD as well as the AI orchestration piece as well. Now, what this helps you do is on one particular side, work with talent, work with your data scientists, and say, where do you see yourself three years from now or five years from now? As part of your evolution in an agentic AI era or an AI era in the future, and what is that particular skill set or upskilling path that you can create, and the kind of capabilities that they need to upskill on, to be platform builders, or even compliance champions or translators. Now you might say that this is a very this is much more of a a simpler path for a data scientist coming from that particular domain of data science and understanding of data analytics. But this also gives an opportunity for going cross domain as well. So now imagine you have a SOC analyst. Who has aspirations of becoming a data analytics compliance champion, and quite frankly, they have a significant amount of understanding of data analytics. They understand security monitoring, they understand governance, risk, compliance, and some of that particular ethical AI data oversight that is there as well. So for them, for a saw analyst to go in this particular path of becoming a data and analytics compliance champion, context engineering and AI governance would be core. But then some of those particular shared portable ones, which I'm sure we all are now much better prompt engineers than we were at least about 18 months ago, but they will need to have a deeper understanding of how do you manage data, what kind of data platforms exist, and how do you manage structured, semi structured, and structured content, and how does that get managed within a data management portfolio. But then there are certain things that are very unique to a compliance, a data analytics compliance champion. It is much more about a deeper understanding of data audit and compliance postures. What are those particular frameworks? How do you go about governing, stewarding that particular data? Understanding of policy management and the regulations, and how do you enforce those particular policies that are there as well. But in addition to that, also how do you go about managing the risk with the AI models that are there as well. So this definitely creates that particular path for AI, for a saw catalyst, to. You know, switch lanes and then become data compliance champions, taking some of those particular core skills that they already have, but upskilling in specific areas as a way to shift careers as well. Now let me pass it on back to Kabeh to bring us home with this. So interesting, you know, going from a SOC analyst to a DNA compliance champion. I want to bring us home by bringing the signals together, right? So if you remember in this first section, we talked about capacity reallocation and the three workforce signals that you would track, right? So AI does more, humans do less, and there is a surge in unplanned demand. Then we also talked about the emotional adaptation. The line goes down before you choose to bring it up. Right, so that's the gold-colored line. The third line, which Soya was just talking about, is new value and new work that you're going to be creating by redesigning jobs, by rethinking the career paths, by rethinking you know the jobs that need to be done. And the messy middle in the middle is the transition phase, where AI has started releasing capacity. The organization has the opportunity to convert it into new value, and this is where all three of these sections come together around capacity, emotional adaptation, and work redesign, so that you can have the five signals that you can track to figure out where your workforce actually is and what you need to do so that you can unlock the next level of maturity for workforce transformation in this AI journey. And this is not something that any one organization or any one function can do together. So for the final slide here, I just wanted to orient you towards that this is really a three-sided transformation, right? So you have capacity reallocation, where well you want the CIOs to provide the capacity potential as the owners or the stewards of technology, but they have to work with the CHRs to create readiness. They have to work with the CFO to understand constraints. On the emotional adaptation side, you have the CIO and the business leaders building trust, whereas you know the CHR might be thinking about how do I manage their skepticism and fear and you know help them go through that. And in work redesign, same thing, you know the CIO and the CHR and the business leads will have to all work together. And to bring it like totally back home at the bottom of the page, if you remember we started from a place of these are three independent battles. When it goes wrong, everything goes wrong. But also when it goes well, everything goes well. So best of luck to you in this three-sided transformation. And really great to be spending the hour with you. If you have any questions, we are happy to take them. And Kabeh, I see a list of questions. One of the questions that I want to address very quickly right now itself, which was more about: Do we have access to those particular analysis? On the previous page, we did see the links to those particular research notes. But in addition, if you have your Gartner subscription, there is a micro site that lists out all of the analysis that we've done for the individual jobs. That we discussed, but we are adding other business functional domains as well, HR in one of them, and then there are others that are coming. So you do have access through your Gartner subscription to all of these critical analysis for the individual jobs and roles. Now, in terms of the questions, how about we begin with. This one, um, was the 1.4 million jobs lost across all industries. Um, this was like they just curious about, uh, that particular survey data. Yeah, I can take that one. Yes, it is cross industries. Um, you know we've looked at it across industries and we looked at you know what percentage of them are AI layoffs data. There are a couple of in-depth notes that you know we can share as part of the follow up for this call. Okay, great, thank you. There's one other question that came up which caught my attention, and I think it's being framed fantastically that this is the first time that we have close to about five to six generations working together, and they have different approaches to how dealing with the understanding of AI, but also the adoption of AI. I would love to get your perspective and then I'll jump in to address that particular question as well. Absolutely. So this was definitely one of my favorite questions. But I think I'll talk about it in the context of some of the other questions also that I saw. So there are questions that are coming around skills atrophy, how to be up skilled. So I saw all of that too, and um. I think the generational piece is really interesting because I think whichever generation we are, we are, we are assuming everybody else is like us, everybody else is going through the same change and everybody else learns the same way, right? And so that actually is is a part of some of the challenges here. You know there is a. Live conversation around you know how do we think about junior talent and how do we bring them in and how do we upskill. But people who are hiring managers are of a different generation. They learn differently and they, um they they think differently. And so that makes it a little bit difficult with this new technology around you know how do you how do you bring these people in who do you bring them in. And how do you create opportunities for them so that they would create value as they are learning the job as well? It's a fascinating question. Right. I share one of my own personal experiences as well. I'm an assistant, I'm an adjunct professor and I teach machine learning and software engineering at my university. And one of the things that I kind of noticed is, when I give these particular projects and I have students who are like. You call them Generation Alpha Millennials, right? But then you also have certain experts who have 15 years and 20 years of experience. And then when I give them certain projects around building an agentic architecture or an agent platform as part of the actual implementation, you see those sort of nuances and the variances of how every team or group kind of approaches it. Where you have the current generation which which would go in, open their Claude code and start building that particular application, while others on the other extreme end of like fully thinking through what that particular architecture needs to be, how do you build that entire software development lifecycle, how would you build these particular models and think about all of the foundational pieces that would be required to build an enterprise grade software. So you see that particular spectrum, and but but I think we are at a very interesting point where we can learn from all of these different aspects. On one side, to be very agile, very quickly prototype, build something, but on the on the other end, also learn from the best practices that have been developed over the past three decades and four decades as to why those are critical or fundamental to building enterprise grade. Applications that are scalable, so it's it's a fantastic question, and yes, it's great to see radical evolution and adoption across the generations that are there. That's amazing. I want to take another question. I see like you know multiple questions coming in with the same line, but the gist of the question is already over indexing on AI capabilities, right? As we are rethinking job redesign. And I think, like you know, as an industry, I mean, right? And I think I actually think that we are a little bit. I think you know, too much we are thinking about what is it that AI can do, and therefore what is the leftover that humans can do. And I think the danger with that way of thinking is that you know we don't know what the next eighteen months or three years are going to look like. That end state is truly unknowable, and in a lot of ways on many different levels. And so if you remember that onion slide that Soya was sharing, one way of thinking about it is. You know, let's chase the jobs of tomorrow and skills of tomorrow, and like let's make sure that we have them. But then guess what? In eighteen months, we have to reinvent the workforce again, right? Another way of thinking about it is: what are the core human foundation skills that we need to have? You know, our ability to problem solve, creativity, innovation, empathy with users. And and what are the core technical skills that we need to have so that we can stay resilient? You know that SOC analyst could become the DNA compliance, champion, right? Like you know by looking at that middle layer. And if you focus on the skills and competencies that do not change that remain relevant, I feel like you build a lot of optionality in the workforce. You bring a lot of flexibility and resilience, both personally and also for the workforce. So yes, I do think there is a little bit of a elimination, substitution. You know, I guess maybe over indexing in this story. But I think AI has the ability to substitute humans, but it can also make us super humans. And so it is a little bit up to us for how we want to think about it and what side of that story we want our organizations to be. Kabeh, not to put you on the spot in the last final two minutes, but if I may dare to, it's a question that comes up significantly on what does that particular future role of junior talent in an AI augmented development environment look like. I know it is something that every organization is dealing with, and it's something I think we as an industry are exploring as well. We are we are definitely exploring. I can tell you that there is definitely one final answer here. I think it's one of those places where we are seeing multiple models emerge and we are looking at them and then you know doing iron analysis on top of it. But one of my favorite models has been um. You know, similar to legal industry, right? Like you know, you hire an associate so that you know for their ability to learn. And you know you don't know what the legal cases the next three years might look like, but you hire an associate that you know has the potential to get there no matter what that future looks like. I think for junior talent it's going to be like that. I think it's going to be a lot of hiring for the ability to learn and on learn and the ability to reinvent yourself and of course like some core technical capabilities. But not as much double click on the specific technical capabilities because there is a very good chance that all of those technical skills are going to be somewhat outdated, you know, by by some future. I would say my advice to anyone who's a junior person today is that they like learn something new and keep that muscle going. I think it's very easy to give it up to AI and like you know stop asking questions or stop the curiosity. Stay curious even if AI makes it easy not to be. Um and and that's the way that you can you know keep you know being flexible and reinvent yourself. I mean, the key thing over there is like what you're suggesting is the entry level roles don't go away, but the ramp may be a little bit steeper when it comes to the value, and that's where you need stronger intentional coaching to be able to you know nurture that. New talent coming into the workforce. Thank you. I think we are at time. Want to pass it on back to Sneha. Thank you so much for all your questions. And you're on standby to help address. So please don't hesitate to reach out to your Gardner reps. And we will be more than happy to share further analysis. So much Kabeh Vaziri Soyeb for sharing your insights. Before you go, just a quick reminder: you can access these additional resources at the bottom of the page. The insights shared today are just a glimpse of the objective indispensable guidance Gartner provides to help CIOs accelerate decision-making, drive digital transformation, while partnering effectively across the organization to deliver business value from their digital investments. Gartner's solution for CIOs combines forward-thinking insights, interactive tools, expert interactions, user experiences, and executive-level guidance from seasoned thought partners, enabling CIOs to lead the charge in advancing their organization's digital strategy and driving innovation. You'll also gain access to role-specific benchmarks, best practices, and contextualized insights tailored to your unique challenges. Plus, ask Gartner our AI-powered tool for instance access to trusted Gartner expertise. To learn more, simply follow the link on this slide and connect with your Gartner representative today. Let's explore how we can help you and your team accelerate impact. You can always also join us at the Gartner IT Symposium Expo to join thought-provoking sessions led by industry visionaries. Meet one-on-one with a Gartner analyst to refine your strategy, network with fellow leaders, and explore the latest innovation from top solution providers. Please follow us on social media and sign up to our biweekly newsletter to receive the latest Gartner IT insights and updates across research, conferences, and more. It's all curated specifically for IT leaders and decision makers. You can access all of these resources from the bottom of the page. Thus, you can get Mugartner insights, access additional resources, and see upcoming and on-demand webinars at Mugartner.com/webinars. And lastly, please don't forget to rate this session and share your feedback on the insights provided. To submit your rating, click the rate session link below the player. A box will open for you to select one to five hearts, with five hearts being the top rating. We also welcome your feedback on the insights provided in the leave for the feedback box. All right. With that, I'd like to again thank our presenter, and of course. Whether you're new to Gartner or an existing client, thank you for joining us today. Goodbye.
