Lucas Kobat Gartner enterprise architecture EA AI transformation value orchestrator. The. Hello, and welcome to this Gartner webinar: Leading Enterprise Architecture in twenty twenty six, a guide for AI enabled transformation. Your task is driving stronger performance on your organization's mission critical priorities. To do that, you need trusted guidance that provides clarity, not just information. At Gartner, we deliver that clarity by combining forward-looking insights from twenty-five hundred experts with rigorous proprietary research methodologies. Our perspective is uniquely informed by our hands-on work with five hundred thousand client interactions across every major function, geography, industry, and sector. We don't just provide the business and technology insights. We work with you to apply them, equipping your team with practical tools and expert guidance to achieve your goals. So whether you're a new to Gartner or one of our existing clients, today you'll get actionable, objective insights rooted in human intelligence to help you move forward with confidence. I'm Robert, the operator for this session. Before we get started, I have a few tips to enhance your webinar experience. Here are our rules of engagement for watching this session. We'll pause a moment to give you time to review them. Around the video player, you find a variety of ways to interact with the session. We encourage you to participate by clicking the Ask a Speaker box to submit your questions and thoughts about this program. You can submit a question honestly, or if you choose, your name, title, and company can be visible along with your question. Navigate to the bottom of the page, download additional resources. Throughout the program, you can rate the session and share feedback. Submit your rating. Locate the rate session link below the player. A box will open up for you to select one to five hearts. Please note that five hearts is the top rating. Share your feedback on the insights provided and leave for the feedback box, and then click send. Webinar is being recorded. Watch this presentation again, and find more great insights on the minute at gartner.com/webinars. And now I'd like to welcome Gartner's director, analyst, and chief of research, Lucas Kobat. Lucas, thanks for joining us. And now, thanks, Robert, and thanks everyone for joining today. Really excited to be here with you. Um, like Robert said, my name is Lucas Kobat. I'm the chief of research for enterprise architecture here at Gartner, and it's my honor to facilitate this session today with you all. So, Robert went over some of our legal and compliance rules that we always have to share with you. Really, there's there's one real ground rule for today, and that is to please ask questions. We have a very large audience, but we want to make this as interactive as we possibly can. And the way that you can do that is you can use the ask the speaker box to enter questions throughout our session. So, without further ado, and in the famous words of Peter Pan, "Come on, everybody, because here we go." All right. Our agenda for today is pretty straightforward. We're going to look at three key issues. The first is we're going to look at the state of enterprise architecture in two thousand twenty-six. The second is we're going to look at how you can lead enterprise architecture success in twenty twenty six and beyond, and then finally we're going to wrap up with some pragmatic steps that you can take. When we end our session here today, so that you can get started toward achieving your goals and success in the enterprise architecture function that you call home. All right, let's get started. This slide should really not come as a surprise to anyone who's been in the practice of enterprise architecture for any given period of time. What we know is that enterprise architects serve a wide ranging group of stakeholders, from delivery teams to business leaders to even executive teams. However, each one of these stakeholder groups has long had challenges with the way that heads of enterprise architecture and their teams deliver decision guidance and support. Uh, when uh we look at delivery teams, right? Often we hear that EA just slows down delivery. We're a roadblock, we're a governance inhibitor, right? For business leaders, they just want their shiny new tool now, right? They they oftentimes are trying to figure out how they can get around architecture governance. And then finally, on the right-hand side there, with executive leaders, oftentimes our guidance and support is. Is too technical and IT-centric for their needs. What this leads to is you can see across the bottom row there is that delivery teams and the rest of IT start to ask, "Well, can we just replace EA with AI capabilities?" or for business leaders, they ask, "You know, why do we even have this EA team? What is their purpose?" And then for our executive partners, you know they they look in the work that we provide and they say, "What value is here? What value is being provided?" And like I said, this comes as no surprise to anyone who's been in EA for any given period of time, and it's backed up by the data that we most recently got from our 2026 Heads of Enterprise Architecture signature survey. You can see some of those data points on the right hand side of the slide there. What we know is that Heads of VA are least confident in securing EA resources or additional budget or staff. Being able to help organizations determine and navigate the impacts of our volatile world, and also scaling artificial intelligence, both within their own EA teams and across the enterprise. And just compounding on top of that, we know that thirty-four percent of heads of AI cite the inability to effectively demonstrate value and return on investment in an EA capability. And what that ends up with, right, is just a simple extension of today's EA function not being enough, not being not being sufficient to really thrive in this next AI era that we find ourselves in. We really do need a complete reimagination of enterprise architecture within our organizations. And one reason for that, right? This is again not a surprise, is that AI sprawl is creating technology risk. You see, you know AI capabilities are hitting today's organizations like a tidal wave. You see lots of different AI capabilities with high rates of adoption already in 2026, and it's really only been two to three years that organizations have been on this journey. There's lots of initiatives going on to enable AI-ready data, or to push AI to the edge, or to provide every employee with generative capabilities, or even you know starting really just this last year and into this year, incorporating AI agents into workflows and leveraging composite AI to get even more fine-tuned capabilities by pairing machine learning with generative tools. Um, and you see at the top of the title wave, there are agentic systems really being the next great leap. As we found in our CEO survey, that a majority of CEOs are planning to adopt autonomous systems or autonomous operations, operations or systems operating primarily without human involvement, really in just the next three years. But that creates a lot of risk, right? And we see some of those risk examples on the right hand side: data privacy exposures, cybersecurity, and operational risks, regulatory challenges, increased AI and associated cloud costs. All of these things are things that each one of those stakeholder groups from the last slide—delivery teams, business partners, and executive groups. All of these stakeholder groups are looking to somebody in the organization to help, and enterprise architecture is well positioned to do so. But we have to be able to do it effectively. But what does that mean, right? What does that mean in terms of how we can provide effective guidance and support? Well, one of the ways is within the IT portfolio. However, we also face a big challenge here. There's a lot of influencing factors on the fact that most easy cost reduction options have already been exhausted. Cost optimization has been a top priority for organizations for the past several years, given growth ambitions and technology investment advancements in AI. Organizations are seeking to trim costs in other places to accelerate their AI programs. Geopolitical tensions. I mean, this is in the news every single day at the top of the headlines in many different regions of the world, creating supply chain issues, creating issues in markets and in sourcing raw materials, and also climate events. Right. And all of these factors contribute to the need for cost optimization. But organizations have already been through the process of cutting what they can in the short term. And honestly, cutting too much in the short term—those immediate cost reductions—they usually don't go far enough. And if we go too far, we actually risk jeopardizing those growth ambitions that our organizations have in the first place. Whereas you know, long term with looking towards the future, those cuts are usually harder to do and they may not get done in time to make a difference. So really, where organizations are stuck at is this balancing act of how can we free up the resources necessary to fuel the growth that we see and that we need while also balancing the short term risks and costs that we face today. And all of this sort of compiles on top of each other. And what we see is that you know, with global forces driving continued turmoil, the mission for organizations is pretty clear. If you play along with me with the recent success of the Artemis II. Mission: We need to launch a proverbial orbital exit that cuts through the noise and above the fray, right? As enterprise architects and heads of enterprise architecture teams, what we really need to do in twenty twenty six and beyond is help the organization leverage the benefits of AI and its relentless advance and maturity while mitigating those risks. Help the organization to navigate economic and geopolitical volatility, and to really step up to the plate and help propel our organization's growth ambitions, and close the gap in terms of our IT organization's ability to deliver. So this, like I said, all wraps up to just one simple fact: the EA discipline faces an identity crisis. Multiple stakeholder groups that we've served for many, many years are all facing challenges. They all have needs that are really not being met by EA today, and so an iterative approach to improving your EA function is not likely to succeed. So instead, what are the things that we can do to ensure success in 2026 and beyond for EA? And that's what we're going to focus on, right? We're going to focus on that in our second key issue. I see some good questions already coming into the chat here. Things like what are the most common AI use cases for the EA function, what are the most common EA activities that no longer scale. There's a lot of good questions here. We are going to get to some of these in our session here today. If not, always feel free to schedule an interaction with one of our experts on our enterprise architecture team to be happy to go into more detail with you. Let's get into this next session because I think we're going to address some of these questions that are coming up in here in the chat. These are great questions. So how can we lead an EA success in 2026 and beyond? Well, the process is pretty simple, right? We make EA mission critical. We have to establish our function as a mission critical change agent that helps our organization adapt to global volatility, high growth, and pervasive AI. How do we do that? Well, there's five imperatives. There's five things that we need to do. One is we need to step into the AI leadership vacuum. The second is that we need to untangle the AI rollout. The third is that we need to begin building dynamic architectures. The fourth is that we need to guide technology investments. And the fifth is that we need to reimagine EA with AI. So these five things are what we're going to talk about today. These five imperatives are what we need to start to act on to deliver success from EA in 2026 and into the future. All right, let's get started with the first imperative. This has to do with stepping into the AI leadership vacuum. And what do we mean by that? Well, Gartner's belief is that we need heads of VA should seize the opportunity and step into any AI leadership vacuum to own and drive AI direction and value. Why do we believe this? Because currently AI is the technology that CEOs believe is going to fundamentally disrupt their business in the next three years. That's not a surprise. What we do know is a challenge, though, is that many organizations do not have a dedicated AI leader, and what this leads to is decentralized experimentation. Redundancy, duplication of effort—all of the things that we try to mitigate from an enterprise architecture perspective—and so what we can do, and on the next slide we'll get into this—is we can, you know, know that if we step into an AI leadership vacuum, we're going to be able to help the organization navigate this big uncertainty. And we're already starting to see this happen, right? This is from our signature survey for heads of enterprise architecture. Sixty-six percent of EA leaders report that they are personally invested in becoming an AI expert by the end of 2026. This partners with a lot of other data points that we see with heads of EA already stepping into this AI leadership role. And what that means is there's a couple steps that we have to take to really fully realize that role and be able to guide our organization. Organizations forward, and the first is we have to make the case for AI leadership. Right? In some organizations, heads of EA are being asked to take this. In some organizations, we're not right. Maybe AI leadership is distributed across a CIO, a CTO, a head of data analytics. Maybe it sits in other areas like the business or other functions like with a chief operating officer. But what we know is that heads of enterprise architecture have a unique perspective between both where our business is trying to go and what our IT organization can enable. And what is realistic in terms of our AI ambitions and the roadmap that it's actually going to take to get there, so we need to make the case to our leadership teams. That EA is the best home for a coordinated enterprise AI effort that's really going to deliver on the ambitions that the organization has. The second thing that we need to do. Is that we need to monitor emerging AI capabilities and evaluate their value and risk. This is one of the biggest challenges with AI today. Is that vendors. Are one continuing to mature their capabilities at record pace, and two, a lot of what they are promising is simply just marketing hype. And so the combination of those two things makes it very foggy in terms of what's realistic, what's feasible, and what can we actually get value from across all of the potential AI technologies, capabilities, and vendors that are out there. As a head of EA and as the enterprise architecture team, we need to be the source of truth and the objective voice in the room about what's possible and really what's not, and quite simply what needs AI and what simply does not in today's organization. The third step here is that we need to orchestrate stakeholder alignment and influence investment decisions. This goes back to that portfolio balancing act that we were talking about a couple minutes ago. There's a lot of competing demands. Every single business unit in your organization is going to think they need something different when it comes to AI. Every delivery team is going to think that they have their favorite model or workflow or what have you. What we need to do is bring everybody together and get everybody moving in the same direction. And what that what that's going to come down to is some tough decisions around where we invest in a specific AI technologies and where we don't. But if we don't create that orchestrated and coordinated approach, again, what we're going to see is that AI sprawl that tidal wave that hits our organization creates undue complexity and a lot of technical debt along the way. Next step that we have to take in order to step into this AI leadership vacuum is that we need to establish adaptive governance across business and IT. This is a concept that we've been talking about at Gartner for some time. Is this concept of adaptive governance? Really, there's four flavors or four styles of an adaptive governance framework. They range all the way from control style governance, which is done through rules and compliance. To outcome style governance, where we prioritize and triage based on value. To agile style governance, where we are able to continuously reprioritize and continuously reassess initiatives, all the way to autonomous styles of governance. And what this really means is introducing new and kind capabilities that our organization might not have had before to automate governance processes and even create workflows that are conducive to agentic ways of working. Um, even bringing in things like Guardian Agent. To help to mitigate the AI sprawl that's already happening, and also create an environment where AI capabilities can successfully bring value, but within guardrails. And then finally, what we need to do to fully realize this AI leadership role that sits out there for most of us with in our grasp is to establish an AI watchtower to measure success. And so this what we're what we're talking about across these steps is really the concept of sort of an elevator architect, right? We need to be able to get into the weeds to help delivery teams move as fast as they possibly can with these AI initiatives. We need to step up a level and help our portfolio teams, our business partners, build a roadmap of initiatives. That's going to drive toward success, and then finally we need to again sort of move out of the orbital chaos and get above that fray and into a tower where we can see what's working and what's not working, and then quickly kill off the things that are not working, prune that portfolio to something that's really going to drive success for our organization. Um, before we move on to the next imperative, let me just check the chat. Um. Oh, there's a good question here. What's the relevance of TOGAF framework in the world of AI? It's a great question from Vicron's here. So Gartner's position on EA frameworks has been clear for a long time, right? We do not advocate for any specific EA framework. We don't say that one is better than the other. The purpose of an EA framework is simply for inspiration. Right, what is out there? What is possible? What does our organization actually need? An EA framework should never serve as aspiration. Right, we should never be seeking to execute an EA framework down to the letter of the law on every single bullet point. Because what we're then doing is we're doing EA for the sake of doing EA, rather than using the EA discipline and EA concepts to push our organization forward and realize some of the ambitions that our organization has, like what we're talking about here with AI. So, it's a great question. Great question. Um, let's see. Uh, one more question before we move on here. David's got a question here. How does EA handle AI teams saying they are the ones to drive the architecture and EA is just a technology architecture. David, you're hitting on something that I was mentioning just briefly before, which is in some organizations, the head of EA is being told by the CIO or even the CEO, "Hey, you need to be our AI leader. You need to bring the organization forward and figure out what's the path for us when it comes to AI." In some other organizations, right, that that request has been made to other groups. That really is the third step in sort of this staircase diagram that we're looking at here on the page. Even different places of the organization that have been given this responsibility of hey run forward with AI, look at the capabilities that we need, the technologies that we need, tell us what we need so we can make the right investments. A lot of times, if it's given to the data and analytics group, or if it's given to the COO, or if it's given to you know the head of enterprise applications. All of these individuals are coming at it from their sort of siloed lens. The benefit we have as enterprise architects is we're able to look across all these groups and say, "What does the organization really need?" So I would you know say we don't want to be combative, right? That's not going to help anybody. But what we can do is we can be collaborative, right, with those groups who have been given those responsibilities and say, hey look, I know you've been asked to do this. These other three groups in our organization have also been asked to move forward really fast with AI. Let's you know come together and see who's working on what. Make sure that we're not you know putting forth any sort of redundant effort that we're not investing in duplicative capabilities. And that we're really putting our organization on the best path forward. That's a critical role that a head of enterprise architecture can play that really very few others in an organization can. So, great question, David. Let's let's keep moving. We're going to move to our second imperative for our session today of the five imperatives that we need to act on now to realize EA success in twenty twenty six and beyond. The second again, no surprise, has to deal with AI. This actually moves beyond just taking that leadership role, but it gets into a little more the nitty gritty on what we need to do to realize AI success. So Gartner's position, Gartner's belief here is that to scale enterprise AI value, we as heads of VA need to sort of abandon our old ways of working, those design-first habits, and instead pursue what we call an enable, deploy, and adapt approach. So let's get into what that means just a little bit because I know we'll all have questions on that. So when it comes to untangling the rollout of AI across the enterprise, what we know from again our signature survey that we just ran for heads of enterprise architecture is that about only forty percent of EA leaders believe that current AI investments. Will have a materially positive impact on their organization's financial performance. Again, this comes from just sort of the pessimism that we're probably seeing as enterprise architects. We see all these different parts of the organization running in different directions. The decentralized experimentation when it comes to AI, and so how do we actually solve for that? Right? How do we get different stakeholder groups within our organization to start picking the right AI investments? To start making the right bets and to stop sort of running over each other in the process, so that we can actually get to that enterprise AI scale that's going to push our organization forward into the future. So how do we do that? Right? How do we execute? How do we actually untangle the rollout of AI across the enterprise? Well, the first thing that we need to do is we need to enable rapid and safe AI experimentation. What What does that mean, right? Well, what it means is we need to again using that sort of elevator architect analogy. We need to get down into the weeds with our delivery teams. We need to see what they're actually working on, what they're considering when it comes to AI investment, and it really comes from what their business partners are asking them to do. So this comes into the conversation of a lot of AI use case conversation. Right, and there was actually a question in the chat just a couple minutes ago about what AI use cases are most prominent or most relevant for an EA team. We can absolutely talk about that, and we're going to talk about that towards the end of our session today. One of the things that we also need to talk about is what are the AI use cases that are most relevant to your organization, and how do we quickly start to execute on those. Right, so that's step one in terms of how we untangle the rollout. Right, and we mark out some bullet points on what that means here: provide lightweight, clear, and practical guardrails, encourage action over documentation. Let's not become roadblocks to AI success by saying we need a seventy-five page solution architecture document before anybody does anything. That's not going to put us in the best position to succeed. The second step that we need to act on here is we need to deploy evolving best practices and patterns. So as we're working alongside these delivery teams, we're going to see what's working and what's not, and what the benefit we have as enterprise architects and heads of enterprise architecture. Is we can then take those learnings and we can promote them across the organization using all of the available channels that we already have. We can work with our executive partners. We can work with our business leaders. We can work with our delivery teams and communities. Many of you probably have centers of excellence or communities of practice that you can plug into and promote these ways of working that will help delivery teams only move faster and in a safer way when it comes to AI experimentation. And finally, we have the third step here, right? Adapt. So we need to adapt architecture to scale AI success, and that really comes down into the conversation of what are we going to scale, what are we going to kill, and we have to be very clear and very objective about what we do. Here, and again, this is less about the science of architecture and as I like to call it, sort of the art of architecture. Because what we're doing is oftentimes we're playing the role of even a therapist for a lot of these business leaders. They are you know very invested in their shiny new object. They want their project to succeed, but oftentimes what's best for the organization is for that project to be shut down. Those resources. To be freed up and for them to be reinvested elsewhere. And as a head of enterprise architecture, what we have to do is we have to be able to bring that individual to the table, bring them into the fold, and help them understand the benefits of what they're going to gain from letting go. Right? And and so that comes down to managing that portfolio, playing that balancing act, and and again like I said sometimes even playing the role of therapist to get people to to come along and orchestrate all the stakeholders that we need. All right. Imperative three is about building dynamic and adaptive architectures. This is a new concept that we've been sort of outlining here at Gartner, and I'm excited to share it with you. Before we move forward, just want to see some of these questions that are coming through in the chat. Ian asks a question. Our organization has a central AI center of excellence separate from the main architecture team. How common is this and is this best practice? Yeah, so Ian again, this is the point I was trying to make about stepping into that AI leadership vacuum. There really is no common practice. There's really no even sort of best practice that's already been established about how you lead AI within an organization. What I have seen multiple times across multiple teams and multiple industries. Is that the head of EA is sort of attached initially with how do we get AI off the ground, and then to run it operationally? Sometimes we turn to that center of excellence, and that center of excellence is basically a cross section of all of the stakeholders that we would have to be orchestrating. Right? So going back to that third step in that staircase diagram. That's really our job: is figuring out who in the organization needs to be in that center of excellence, and if that center of excellence is already established, it's how do we get all of those players to work together in the best possible way that they can. Um, so again, great question, great question. And if everybody, if you see a question that's being asked and you have the same one, just go ahead and give it a thumbs up. I'm looking at the most voted questions here just so that we can get the the questions answered that everybody has the most interest in. Before we move on to the third imperative, just looking at time here, we probably have time for one more. James, you've got a question: How do you deal with the development and business teams' inability and unwillingness to adequately assess the business benefits and actual cost of AI before building something that might not make sense? The rush to doing POCs and pilots without any clarity of business value. Absolutely, absolutely. So that's where that conversation about use cases becomes really critical. Um and James, what I would recommend is, as heads of enterprise architecture, we have to if we haven't already started, we have to start doing our homework on the top use cases for our organization. That means staying on top of industry press, that means having real conversations with our business partners today, that means looking at what's actually feasible from AI vendors and their marketplaces of capabilities. Um and then you know from a Gartner perspective, we absolutely can help with that. If you haven't seen it, what we have is we actually have an entire AI use case dashboard that is broken down by industry, that's broken down by functional area of the organization, whether it be marketing, whether it be supply chain, HR, IT, you name it. And we're we're starting to see all of these use cases that actually have promise. We're figuring out which organizations have done it successfully. We're providing them as case studies, and we're actually giving you a ranking of AI use cases. In terms of business benefit and then feasibility, right? So and and risks included in that feasibility metric as well. So you can start to, if you haven't already, go into that dashboard, start seeing what's relevant for your organization, and bring that into the conversations you are having. Excuse me with your with your teams, right? Because. That's the only way we're going to get people to consider what's going to work and what is not going to work is if we have some sort of way to to think about this simply right business value versus feasibility, and then start plotting our prioritized use cases against it. And that doesn't mean that we you slow people down on the move to POCs. What it means is that we at least just ask the right questions before we get there. All right, just looking at time here. Let's jump into this third imperative about building dynamic and adaptive architectures. So, again, Gartner's position is that head to VA must build dynamic architectures that adapt to shifts in enterprise conditions. So, there's a really interesting data point that I wanted to bring to people's attention. We asked about this actually just in our last agenda poll that we got back just a couple weeks ago, and what we saw is that only 25% of HEDSVA are very confident in their ability to adapt architectures to rapid business changes. And why does this matter? Well, when we were going over sort of the macro challenges that organizations face today, we were looking at. Things like geopolitical instability, right? And one risk that's really risen to the top of a lot of organizations' profiles today is sovereignty, right? Cloud sovereignty, AI sovereignty, you know, business sovereignty. Where are we actually going to be allowed to operate, and where can we source capabilities and which partners can we work with based on where they're at in the world? That has a immediate impact on our architectures because a lot of them break if you know two regions of the world suddenly cannot trade with each other, or you know the level of fiscal policy that's being implemented in a certain area just becomes too much of a burden and we then you know cannot operate feasibly in that area or source from that area. And so the the thing that we need actually is a whole new way about thinking about the the enterprise architecture for the organization. And so, what we're starting to call this is we're starting to call this a dynamic state architecture. But before I get to that concept, let's just play out traditionally what happens. Right? So as as heads of enterprise architecture, as people that lead EA teams, or as enterprise architects ourselves, what we always do is we say, "Well." Where does the organization want to go, right? So what does our future state architecture look like? And we look at lots of different things within that future state architecture. We'll look at our business and technical capabilities. We'll look at our delivery model. We'll look at our current technology investments. We'll look at the governance model that we have in place. The outcomes that the organization is trying to achieve, and say, all right, well, how does everything need to fit together? What does everything need to look like in that future state? And then we'll we'll say, all right. Well, if that's where we want to go, what do we currently have? And we'll look at that current state architecture. Right, same same building blocks, but just from the lens of what we already have. The challenge is is that our organization moves faster than we realize those future states, right? And so what we have is this future state, this beautiful piece of you know architecture diagram work that we've done on the right hand side of the page. But our organization's current state is already maybe five or six iterations past what we started with. By the time we even get close to realizing that feature state architecture. And that is because of a lot of the different risks that we've just been talking about: geopolitical instability, cost optimization, sovereignty as a risk. Right? And so what we need to do is instead of planning for a fixed long-term vision, we need to monitor in real time how our current state is changing and then reconfigure dynamically. And what that requires is it requires us to look at each one of those building blocks, whether it be business and technical capabilities, whether it be our delivery model or the way that we do technology investment. Or how we govern the IT portfolio. We need to look at all of those different things, and we need to say, how can we even shift those things to be more autonomous, those things to be more automated, or for them to at least be able to reconfigure dynamically and more modularly than they have been before. And so there's a lot that we can get into here. We're not going to have time. Cover it all today. If you have further questions on this, this would be a great one to follow up with one of the analysts on our team because they can unpack each one of these building blocks and help your organization figure out. Well, how do we move from sort of those static, stagnant future state architectures? That really never get realized to actually being able to adapt and shift with our organization as these new enterprise conditions are introduced. So again, a very fascinating area, a very real thing that we all need to be working on. Let's see, are there other questions here in the chat that we should be answering? Let's see a lot of AI questions. A lot of great AI questions. So somebody asked, "What are the key artifacts that you would expect EA to ask solution teams working on AI projects to produce? Would you have templates to share?" Yeah, absolutely. So, this goes back to sort of like our abandon old design first habits. Sometimes, we're not going to have the time to put together a seventy-five page solution architecture document. If we really want to enable and realize the value from a particular AI capability, what we should do is we should do sort of that you know business of value versus feasibility risk analysis, and then we should have at least considered the alternative solutions in terms of how we're going to source this or we're going to build by blend. But then beyond that, right? Sometimes we just there's. There's just not the time for those traditional artifacts, and so what I would recommend is instead of pursuing assurance by document, is pursue assurance by partnership. Right, actually get down alongside these delivery teams and help them move faster. See the risks that they as they come, and you're going to be able to help those delivery teams navigate a lot of that complexity that we try to mitigate by packing it all into a document that can then be referenced at a later point in time. Um, let's see. Another question here: Is it worthwhile to ready EA pattern and framework guidance as policy in markdown format for inclusion in a context layer for agentic solutions to consume? Dave, you're getting ahead of me here. We're absolutely going to talk about this when we wrap up with reimagining EA with AI. Um. But I will just say a piece of that actually is is very important to what we're looking at here on the page about building dynamic and adaptive architectures. The orchestration layer within our digital foundations within our technology stack is going to become more important than ever. Right, the ability to orchestrate and multi-agent systems. Right, every vendor is pushing that they have a multi-agent system, whether it be Salesforce, whether it be SAP, whether it be Oracle, whoever it is. Right, it's great that they are providing agents to our organization. How do all of those agents work together to actually accomplish goals that our organization has? And so that's where that orchestration layer becomes more critical than ever has been. And we as enterprise architects and people who lead enterprise architecture teams, we need to be very clear on what that orchestration layer needs to look like, and we need to start building it. But again, we can't build it in a fashion of here's what it's going to look like three years from now in a nice, pretty picture. We need to realize that the current state of our organization's orchestration layer even. Is going to change seven times before we get it right, and so we need to be very in tune with how that is changing and help design those changes and reconfigure when things are not working. Right. So again, that that that ties into what we're talking about here with dynamic and adaptive architectures, and then how we build EA guidance in a way that can be consumed by agents. It's a fascinating question. We'll get to it here in just a couple minutes. So so bear with me. All right, we've got about twenty minutes left in our time together today. Time is flying. We've got two more imperatives that I want to talk about, and then there's going to be a poll question. We'll wrap up with some pragmatic steps. The fourth imperative that we're going to look at here in terms of the five things that we got to do to drive success in 2026 is that we have to both act as an investment advisor and a venture capitalist in terms of helping to guide our CIO in balancing those immediate and long term IT investments. Again, this goes back to the sort of that macro challenge about you know those easy cuts have been exhausted. So what do we do now? And you know what we see in terms of the data that we get back from heads of enterprise architecture is that seventy nine percent of EA leaders claim that they are responsible for the IT cost optimization strategy and held accountable for actual cost optimization realized. Right, so this is factoring into our annual goals. This is how our performance is being measured. Are we able to successfully balance those short-term cost-cutting strategies with the long-term cost optimization approaches that we need to really drive growth in the future? And how do we balance those two things for our CIO? And so, what we are positioning here at Gartner is that you really need to play both roles at the same time. So, we need to be both the financial advisor and the venture capitalist. And what does that really mean? Well, the first is that we need to, as the financial advisor, pursue those IT cost reduction and optimization initiatives. We need to be able to eliminate waste, maximize value, and align IT spend with business strategy. And at the same time, and on the other hand, we need to be the CIO's venture capitalist. We need to be on the lookout, scanning the horizon for those technology investment opportunities. We need to be able to identify, assess, and enable those investments that are going to drive innovation and competitive advantage within our organization. It was funny. We were sharing some of these positions and some of these findings with with a group of heads of enterprise architecture a couple weeks ago, and one of them spoke up and they said, "Hey, you know my CIO came to my office the other day and they said that yeah, your role as the head of enterprise architecture is that you are now the venture capitalist for our organization." And I think this just rings true because we see that tidal wave of AI capabilities crashing in on our organization. We see emerging technologies beyond AI, whether it be you know post quantum cryptography or physical AI. You know the the bringing of AI capabilities into polyfunctional or humanoid robots. These things are not that far off in terms of their impact or ability to impact organizations today. We as heads of enterprise architecture need to be experts in. The technology in sort of that twelve to eighteen month, maybe twenty four month horizon that has that risk or opportunity for our organization, and be guiding our stakeholder groups on how they can actually act on and realize value from those technologies now. Great. So that brings us through four of the things that we need to do today to realize success for EA in 2026. Just looking at the chat. Ian, Ian, you've got another great question here. A lot of people also had the same question. Looks like a lot of thumbs up on this one. Are you going to take into account different levels of maturity? In different organizations, yeah. So when we gather survey data, we make sure that we get a cross section of industry of EA profile, right? So when you look at the the findings that we're sharing with you, this is not from the most mature clients, right? I would say this is actually where you know sort of the middle of the bell curve is in terms. Of where heads of enterprise architecture are at, what they're doing, the challenges that they're considering. If you're in you know more of a leading EA practice versus more like a mainstream or conservative EA practice. The way that you apply these findings or the way that you pursue success might change a little bit, right? Your mileage may vary, but these imperatives remain the same. These are all things that we need to be focusing on as heads of VA and making sure that we have an answer to when somebody comes and asks us, "Hey, what are you doing about this?" For our organization. Now, what we're turning to now with this last imperative is we're turning a little bit inward, right? And a lot of you have been asking questions in the chat about this: How can we reimagine EA with AI? Well, our position at Gartner is that heads of EA who don't proactively use AI to optimize EA activities will become a roadblock to increasing demand from business and IT stakeholders, and that's the last thing we want, right? Going all the way back to the beginning. We know that our stakeholders see us as a roadblock more times than they than they probably should. We know that we sort of face an identity crisis because we have too many stakeholders to serve with too many problems. So, how can we scale our decision support, increase the capacity of our teams, and deliver success? A lot of it's going to come down to our ability to successfully integrate AI capabilities into our function. Um, and what we know is that this is already happening. You guys are already doing this. This comes from again that survey I've cited a couple times, our signature survey for heads of enterprise architecture. Um, this is the percentage of AI augmented EA activities by year. So last year you said that 14 of EA work was augmented by AI. This year, 23. We asked you all what you thought about next year, and you said thirty percent—almost a third of EA activities are going to be augmented by some sort of AI capability. So what does that look like? What does that mean? Well, at Gartner, we've come up with a path forward to actually help transform the EA operating model using AI. And I want to share those steps with you today at a high level. If you have interest in any going deeper on any of these steps, obviously our team would be happy to. Spend some time one on one with you, getting in digging into how we can enact these steps at your organization. But the first one is that we just simply need to assess AI's potential for. It's a first step of moving away from sort of that traditional EA model and our journey toward an AI enabled EA operating model. And what that looks like, right, is we need to think through what are the use cases. Again, going back to the conversation we had about how EA helps the enterprise. This is how we help ourselves now. We look at the use cases that are being provided by EA vendors, EA tool vendors, that other AI tools are offering. You know, maybe we have an enterprise license with a particular vendor. What kind of capabilities that can they provide that can augment the work that we're already doing. EA that can offload some of the responsibilities from our architects who are already too time constrained and too spread thin. So that's step one. Step two is that we need to organize for an AI augmented EA. So this means how our AI capability is going to come alongside our architects. And what is the sort of organizational model that we're going to deploy? Right, are we going to have a distributed model where we have architects spread out across the organization? We're going to have a centralized model where we have architects being plugged into the most impactful projects, and then maybe we use AI capabilities almost as toolmates. Sitting alongside those delivery teams that are distributed and giving them the guidance and support that they need. What is the structure going to look like for that? The next step on that journey is to identify those high-value EA AI tools. Right? So what are the tools out there that can do what we need to do from an EA perspective, but in a way that makes them automated or even autonomous? Once we do that, right? Then we need to also at the same time audit EA tools for AI readiness. So you know, this is again what I was saying about AI tools, enterprise licenses to AI vendors are going to get us part of the way. EA tools and EA vendors that are specifically integrating AI capabilities for the things that we already do. That's another spot to look for. How do we bring these capabilities into our organization into our function? After that, we need to mitigate AI specific risks. Again, these are risks that are more known than they ever have been before, right? So hallucinations, poor data quality. What are the specific risks that we're going to face when we're trying to bring AI capabilities into our organization? And then prove AI enabled value again. Like anything we do with EA, we probably should not be doing this with a big bang approach. What we should do is we should try certain use cases within our EA function, test that they are working, test them with a small number of stakeholders, and then after we've proved that those use cases are showing value. Then scale that as a way of working across the organization. Whether it be roadmap generation, whether it be reference architecture generation, whether it be architecture governance reviews, whether it be whatever AI use cases we're pursuing from an EA standpoint. Make sure that those things are working, and then scale. Um, and then lead by example, right? We just talked about how as heads of VA, we have a critical role to play in driving the AI direction of the entire organization. That we sort of need to step into that leadership vacuum, and what better way to do it than to show that we can do it within our own area of the world, right? That we are really maximizing the value that we're getting from AI today and the reason that we're able. To do it is because we followed this path, we followed these steps. Because the way that we've outlined this path, you really can apply to any part of your organization, whether you're working with supply chain or finance. For marketing, right? All of these different areas, we can help them follow and take this same journey. But if we've already done it ourselves, it's just proof of concept that we know what we're talking about and we have the credibility when we walk into that room. And then finally, that leads us to AI-enabled EA. Right? So then we we've gotten to a point where we have transformed that EA operating model. We haven't relied just on our traditional past, and we are able to to drive a path forward. So that, you know, that wraps up those those five imperatives that we need to focus on for enterprise architecture to drive success in 2026. I do want to get to our third key issue here. We've got about nine minutes left. Let me just answer some of the top questions here that haven't been addressed. Rich, you're asking, can you please share a definition list of the four different AI governance models? Awesome, yeah, yeah. So I was talking about adaptive governance. This is not specific to AI, but they were a control outcome based, agile and autonomous. For AI today, that autonomous style of governance is becoming more critical and more necessary than ever before. And if you either you ask your account rep from Gartner about that adaptive governance model, they can provide you all the material you need. Or if you schedule an inquiry or a consultation with somebody from our team, we can deep dive on that with you a little bit more. All right, let's go to the pragmatic steps. And for this, I really want to hear from you because I think we can all learn from each other here, just in terms of what we're going to do going forward. Right? Because change is hard, the status quo is hard. We really need to. Just at the end of the day, choose our heart and figure out what it's going to take to be successful across the rest of 2026 and beyond. So Robert's going to help us out here, but we're going to put up a poll question, and it's going to ask you, you know, which imperative is your top focus for the rest of 2026. Of the five that we talked about today, so stepping into the AI leadership vacuum, untangling the rollout of AI, building dynamic and adaptive architectures, adopting financial advisor and VC hats, or reimagining EA with AI capabilities. Um, and after you've answered that, answered that, if you could just do us one more favor because I think everybody's going to get value from this. If you just put in the ask the speaker chat, tell us what the biggest challenge is to realizing that EA success. Right? What are the top things that you're facing today that are really getting in the way of you doing any of these things successfully? Because ultimately, you know, you all will have the opportunity to learn from each other. It also helps us at Gartner provide you the best kind of insights that you're looking for. Excellent. Thank you so much, Lucas. Yes, our poll is not open. We'd like to know what you are thinking. You can see the poll pop up now on the right, right over the slides. In case you can't see the poll on your screens, please refresh your browser window. Once the poll is visible, simply select the answer of your choice and click submit. Once you close the poll, we'll display the final results for everyone to see in the video player. And please continue to enter your questions for Lucas in the bigger box. I'll also, since we're going to have a lot of people on the. Call. I may just um sort of come back in and say, "Here's what the most common answers are that we're seeing in that response part in the ask speaker chat," just so I don't flood the chat with everyone's responses. Awesome, thanks Robert. Thanks Robert. I know we've got about five minutes left in our time together today. I want to get as many of your questions answered as we possibly can. So here's a question, a good question from Sean. It piggybacks off of what we were just talking about. What organizations consistently get wrong when modernizing EA for AI? Um, and Sean, this is a great question. Um, I actually just published a research note. You can find it on the Gartner portal. Talks about how you redesign the enterprise architecture role for the AI era, and one of the things that we see is that we we. Unfortunately, still view AI as a silver bullet, right? And it's simply not. What you can never take away from the enterprise architecture role is the human judgment and capacity for empathy that will never be able to be coded into any sort of AI capability. And so when it comes to the strategic nature of the architecture job, where we are designing, where we are red mapping, where we are sort of playing that therapist role between stakeholders. All of that actually just becomes even more critical in an AI world where AI actually helps is it helps in sort of mitigating the redundancy of an enterprise architect's day. Right? How many times are we asked by a solution delivery team, "What is the pattern for this technology?" Again, do we have this application with them? Our portfolio. Do we have something that meets these business requirements that my partner is asking me for? Right, all of those redundant conversations. Even simply putting something like an AI assistant that is on top of your EA repository, that in and of itself saves you so much time and saves your architect so much time from answering those same kind of questions over and over and over again. So AI helps scale the decision support that we're able to provide. It certainly doesn't replace the value that an enterprise architect brings by any means. And Robert, looks like we are getting these poll results back. Looks like building dynamic and adaptive architectures is just being out. Reimagine EA with AI for the imperative that's going to be our top focus for the rest of 2026. This is fascinating, and and it really just goes back to what I was saying before. You know, you read the news today, it's every single headline, especially just in the past week. Things happening in the Middle East, things happening in Europe, things happening in the US. And how all of these different regions of the world are interacting with each other. This sovereignty risk is really rising to the top and sort of changing how organizations think in terms of. Where are our technology vendors located geographically? What sort of resilience measures are we putting in place for how our organization, how our architectures change if you know certain decisions are made? Doing that scenario modeling. So absolutely, this is definitely a priority area for Gartner. And if you have questions in this area, please feel to reach out. We have teams of analysts who are working on how we how we change our architectures to be more dynamic and adaptive. Excellent. Yes, and the answers in regards to that second part, we're seeing it kind of vary all over the place. But a lot of it is whether it's about governments or having not having a clear leader for those initiatives in EA of deciding who's really there kind of. Um, muddies the waters there. Um, not a strong backing for EA function within the company, et cetera. So really kind of, there's not one common theme or sort of thing that all they're sort of multiple and varied. From that from that aspect, Lucas. But I can throw it back to you for um question. Yeah, thanks Robert. Thanks. Well, we've got about two and a half minutes left. I see that some folks are having to drop off. Totally understand. We all have busy schedules and busy lives that we're leading these days. Just in the last minute here, Ken asks a really great question: Are there any specific tools you would recommend to help enable EA with AI? Since this was the second top focus area for us for the rest of the year, what I would say is yes, absolutely. The EA vendor market obviously they all are working on bringing AI capabilities into their tool sets. Um, our analyst on our team, Austin Steinmetz, he's leading the Magic Quadrant for enterprise architecture tools this year. He would be. Great person to have a conversation with about if you're already using an EA tool, which capabilities can you bring in to enable that that AI success with EA, or if you're not using an EA tool. Who might you look at, or what other tools exist out of that outside that EA vendor market that can satisfy your needs? We can absolutely have that conversation with you, and you sort of tailor it to your specific situation. But great question. I know a lot of people are thinking through that today. All right. Well, I think that's all the time we're going to have for questions. I see some more folks are dropping off. Thank you all so much for your time today for plugging in and digging in with me, asking a lot of great questions. I know we covered a ton of material. If you have specific questions or if you want to think through with a Gartner expert. How you apply these imperatives or these strategies within your team within your enterprise. Feel free to give us a call. We are always here to help. We just got to know how we can best do that for you. With that, I'll sign off for today and hope to talk to you all and see you all again real soon. Thanks a lot. Yes, thank you so much to Lucas. To our audience, before you go, we've included some additional resources at the bottom of the page. Quick reminder: this webinar is being recorded. You can watch this presentation again and get more great insights on demand at garner.com/webinars. Lastly, we do ask you please rate this session. And um, to do so, a box will um sorry, submit your rating. Click rate session below the player. A box open up where you select one to five hearts. Please note that five hearts is the top rating. You share your feedback on the insights provided in leave for the feedback box, and then click send. That again, like to thank our presenter and of course, thank you the audience for listening. Have a great day. Goodbye.
