Ryan Polk Gartner procurement CPO agentic AI supplier multitier. Ryan Polk Gartner procurement CPO agentic AI supplier multitier. Ryan Polk Gartner procurement CPO agentic AI supplier multitier. Ryan Polk Gartner procurement CPO agentic AI supplier multitier. Hello and welcome to this Gartner webinar: Steps for procurement to become AI-first. You have tasked with driving stronger performance on your organization's mission-critical priorities. To do that, you need trusted guidance that provides clarity, not just information. At Gartner, we deliver that clarity by combining forward-looking insights from our 2,500 experts with rigorous proprietary research methodologies. Our perspective is uniquely informed by our hands-on work with 500,000 client interaction across every major function, geography, industry, and sector. We don't just provide the business and technology insights; we work with you to apply them, equipping your team with practical tools and expert guidance to achieve your goals. So whether you're new to Gartner or one of our existing clients today, you'll get actionable objective insights rooted in human intelligence to help you move forward with confidence. I'm Tanya, your operator for the session, and before we get started, I have a few tips to enhance your webinar experience. So we have provided our rules of engagement for watching this session. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself. I'm going to stop on this slide for a few seconds for all of you to have a look. All right. So around the video player, you will find a variety of ways to interact with the session. We encourage you to participate by clicking the As a Speaker box to submit your questions and thoughts throughout this program. You can either submit a question anonymously, or if you choose, your name, title, and company can be visible along with the question. Navigate to the bottom of the page to download additional resources, and throughout the program, you can read the session and share feedback. So, to submit your rating, locate the rate session link below the player. A box will open for you to select one to five hearts. Please note that five hearts is a top rating. Share your feedback on the insights provided in the leave for the feedback box and click send. Also, this webinar is being recorded. You can watch this presentation again and find more great insights on demand at gartner dot com slash webinars. Now I'd like to welcome Gartner's vice president analyst Ryan Polk. Ryan, thank you so much for joining us, and now I'll turn it over to you. Thank you, Tanya, and good morning, good afternoon, or good evening to everyone joining today. Depending on where you're where you're at in the world, my name is Ryan Polk and I'll be your your host for for today's session. Today we're we're going to talk a little bit about AI. Right, so a couple months ago we did a session. My colleague Andrew Greenwald did a session on the future of procurement. Where we touched on some AI related topics, and it was really really well received. And as you can imagine, this is an incredibly hot topic for all of our clientele. But really, you can't go a day without hearing hearing about AI. And so we wanted to put on this webinar to revisit some of those concepts and really do a bit of a double click on some of those some of those concepts that we introduced a couple of months ago. Logistically speaking, the way we're going to handle this webinar is we're going to look at. You know what is impacting sourcing and procurement from an AI perspective today. Where are we heading? How are we becoming AI first? And we're going to look at that through the lens of a number of predictions. We have several predictions that I'm going to take you through. Spanning the next three to five years, so we'll take a look at we'll take a look at those and really take a look at how do we become AI first because that is the big question today. So we have about thirty minutes or so of content, and then we are going to open the floor up to Q and A, where I'll be responding to all of the questions that you have. So you'll see on the right hand side of. The the web browser that you're joining here today. There's going to be a box that you can submit your questions. I would encourage you to do that, and I will filter through and and go through those questions towards the end of the session. So with all that said. Let me level. Let me let me set the foundation for the conversation today, but just taking a look at some of the trends that are happening in the AI space, and then we'll kind of get into these predictions and you know what we believe needs to happen to actually usher procurement into the future here. So to begin with, I just want to start with you know a couple a couple or really three three key or key three trends that are really happening in the space of AI right now. So on the on the far left hand side, number one. From a tech perspective, you're seeing the context windows of AI models expand quite dramatically in recent years. Now, I'm not going to get into you know precisely what a context window is with respect to AI, but what you need to know is that it's really the amount of information. That an AI model can take in at any given point in time, while operationalizing an ask or while responding to a question. Now the reason this matters is because the more contextual information. A model can ingest, if you will, while you're interacting with these models. Presumably, the better, the more accurate, the more precise that model is going to be. Like if you think about all the information that we take in as human beings, as part of our day-to-day responsibilities, as part of our just interactions throughout life, it is a tremendous amount of data that we're seeing, that we're hearing, that we're feeling. All that sensory input allows us to basically move throughout our lives. As AI context windows expand, it makes them better. Right? It allows them to take in more peripheral information to make their responses more accurate. The second kind of thing that's happening right now, and this has been happening for the last couple of years, is you're seeing models come online with more and more reasoning abilities. This is kind of like a think before you speak type functionality. If you're using some of the latest and greatest models that are out there today, you might have seen this. It's called chain of thought kind of reasoning. As you interact with these models, you'll actually see the models themselves. Thinking through their response before they provide it. Again, it's kind of like a think before you speak type of capability, and what this promises is to reduce the rates of things like hallucinations and and really just again allow models to handle more complexity. Right, take on activities and respond to questions that are more complicated in nature. Again, kind of ushering these models up the maturity curve, if you will, in terms of what it can actually support. And then on the right hand side. You know, you're certainly seeing AI become more and more multimodal in nature. Multimodality here really is getting at this idea or this concept that AI can interact with multiple forms of context and multiple forms of data. So, you know, if yesterday's models were largely text in, text out functionality, you know, today's models and presumably future models are very much kind of anything in, anything out. So think. You know, submitting text to a model, but then getting an image out. Right? We've all seen that. Think about putting an image in and getting text out, or a video in and getting text out, or audio out. Right? It's kind of anything in, anything out. Now, what's interesting. About you know the progress that that that's happening in the kind of AI technology space, is that when you put some of these trends together, when you when you put some of these progress lines together, what's becoming clear is that AI is becoming more agentic. Right, we've we've heard that word. This has been the buzzword of the last you know twelve to eighteen months: agentic AI. And in procurement, and I would argue really, the majority of the business world, the way we're experiencing agentic AI are through you know AI agents. Now, from my vantage point at Gartner, there has been a tremendous amount of "quote unquote" agent washing. In in the marketplace, right? You talk to the vendor community, you talk to various folks—the folks that you know commentators on on this topic broadly around AI—and everyone's going to have to claim. Everyone's going to claim to have you know an AI agent for you know something, right? It's it's been such a hot topic. Um, and I want to just quickly define how we think about an AI agent. So we're we're kind of on the same page here, and then we'll look at you know how real is this, right? Where we actually at. So when we think about an agent, an AI agent, the way we kind of conceptualize it is it's it's an AI model that has the ability. To one perceive an environment, and then two act on that environment independent of a human prompt, and it's that independence that is a really really big red line in the sand that we have to pay attention to. To here because we're not talking about a simple copilot that has the ability to kind of do really cool things but is reliant on the human for prompting. An AI agent goes a step further and it allows it really gives the the model the ability to action something without that human intervention. Right, that's a really big kind of red line in the sand, a you know delineating line between you know these copilots that maybe we've been using for the last couple of years and and what everyone's kind of talking about. And to be sure, we've seen the emergence of. You know, some narrowly focused AI agents in sourcing and procurement. There's negotiations agents that are out there. There's some spend analytics agents that are out there. You know, we're beginning to hear more and more about these orchestration agents. Right? That's been another big hot topic in sourcing and procurement. Um, but this is certainly still very much. A future-oriented sort of conversation. We've seen a lot of pilots, but we haven't seen these broadly at scale quite yet. And I want to get into to some of the reasons maybe why. And this is going to bring me to kind of one of the first predictions that we have. Around kind of the agentication of of sourcing and procurement, and one of the things that we believe is that through twenty twenty seven. Only twenty percent of procurement organizations will have sufficient data and process maturity to use multi-agent systems. But those that do, right, so that twenty percent that do, are going to gain real competitive advantage over those who don't. Now I want to break this down a little bit, right, and I want to explain kind of why we believe this and really kind of what's going on because everyone's kind of hearing about. Agents and the the need for data and and process maturity, but I want to explain it in as simplest terms that I can to make sure this point lands because this is incredibly important to all of the folks that are on the line here today that you know want to start to invest in. AI generally speaking, but particularly agents here. So let me let me break down kind of this this idea of data management with respect to AI and really data management with respect to you know AI agents. So first of all, when I talk about you know master data management for the purposes of AI, I'm not talking about simply how we. Govern and manage, and really think about just structured data. Right, like there's this this misnomer in procurement that that goes something like, you know, when we talk about data management, we're talking about like a spend taxonomy or our contracts repository or our master vendor list. Right, that is important, but that's not really the the full story here. When we talk about data strategies for AI, we're really talking about a combination of structured data. Semi structured data and unstructured data, and it's really those the the the the types of data that live in that semi structured box and that unstructured box that are really kind of holding us back. You can kind of think about it this way if you want to wrap your your head around this. Think about any of the work that you do today, or the tasks or activities that you know your employees do today, and then ask yourself, you know, what data do I need, or what data do my employees need to actually move from point A to point B in that activity, or you know, in that task, or as part of that workflow. I'd be willing to bet that there is a lot of data that lives in that semi-structured that lives in that structured box, right? So so a lot of folks are going to be looking at you know Excel-based data or looking at data that lives in you know Power BI or Tableau, you know stuff that's in a cell if you will. But I'd be willing to bet even more money that most people are far more reliant. On semi structured and unstructured data, right? So this would be information that lives in like a SOP document. Or a process document, or a policy document, or maybe on the unstructured side, it's information that you know lives in like a Microsoft Teams chat, or it lives in your outlook, or maybe it lives in your brain after you've gotten off a Teams call, you know, with a business partner about requirements. Right? All of this sort of data, or all of this sort of information, is effectively a form of data that goes into our brains as humans. And gets processed, and it allows us to work through a task or activity, right? So sensory input information across structured, semi structured, and unstructured data are effectively the data inputs human beings need to actually do work, right? Now the insight here is that AI needs the exact same thing. If we want to deploy AI across. You know, whatever use case, or if we want to deploy AI agents across any number of use cases, you know, those models are going to need the exact same thing. They're going to need that same sort of data to be successful. Now, the unfortunate reality. Is that in procurement, and really, this is not an indictment on procurement. This is for any functional area. We are pretty bad at managing semi structured and unstructured data. And I think this is partly because of kind of how we grew up, right? We we've always kind of focused on the structured side, but now the conversation really needs to pivot to how do we manage and govern that semi structured and that unstructured data components. And this is why you see a lot of organizations investing in things like business process mining. You see largely a lot of investments in very advanced companies. Into the areas of understanding the ontology of their business, basically looking at it from the perspective of do I fully understand the mathematics that goes into decision making and have I fully documented. That mathematics down on paper somewhere, such that I actually have a training database, for my AI use cases and my AI models and my AI agents that I want to invest in to learn from and to refer back to. But again, you know most organizations aren't quite there yet, right? So this is driving our prediction that through the next couple of years, most companies aren't really at a maturity level to get to this point. Now, if you want to make improvements here. The the the place to start is really in collaborating with your IT departments. Now, every organization structured a little bit differently, right? So so some of the larger companies are you know maybe have some of these resources in house within a sourcing procurement team, but by and large, most companies are going to need to collaborate with their IT partners to make material improvements here. And so I want to just kind of outline a bit of a. Quick journey, if you will, around kind of what this looks like in practice. Right, so let's say that you know you you want to improve your quote unquote data readiness, you know for the purposes of AI, right? So you have a list of use cases that you want to deploy, and you know you're looking at this and saying, well, I need to you know get better from a data perspective to make sure that when I deploy these use cases, I'm realizing a a true ROI. The first thing that you you really want to do. Is you want to scrutinize all of the AI use cases that you're assessing against the current understanding of your data maturity with respect to AI in the first place. So what this means is, take a list of your AI use cases that you're looking at, and actually ask yourself, for each one of these use cases, do I fully understand. Do I fully understand all of the data points that go into the decision logic and the decision-making models of those use cases across structured, semi-structured, and unstructured data? Now this is a pass fail, you know, step in the process. Most of you are going to quickly realize just how much quote unquote tribal knowledge is holding the organization together here, because you're going to find out that a maybe I don't know all of the data points that go into the decision logic of a particular use case, or b I know it but it's trapped in someone's head and it's not documented anywhere. Right, and so as you look at that, you have to either throw that use case out if you don't know what data is going to you know go into a use case, or be you have to develop a plan for documenting that data somewhere. Right, the second thing is you have to think about your governance. So if we look at the far the top right hand side of the um. The circle here, you know, you know once you decide to move forward with the use case, you have to ask yourself, well, how am I going to govern that data? Right? Like, what what does that actually look like? Are there ethical concerns? Are there compliance concerns? Are there data privacy concerns? Right? You have to make sure that it's in full compliance with the requirements of your larger organization from a data management perspective. Right, it's it's it's it's it's not as simple as saying I know what data goes into a use case. You also have to ask yourself, can I even use that data in an AI context? And sometimes the answer to that question is yes, sometimes the answer to that question is no. Now let's assume we've we've we've you know checked those two boxes. So we have some use cases where we fully understand the data that goes into them, and we understand the governance realities, and we can still proceed. At that point, we have to work with IT to prepare those data pipelines. Now, this is something that largely in my experience procurement is not necessarily owning, but this is where IT is coming in and saying, "Okay, how can I actually connect these disparate data sources across structured, semi, and unstructured data to an AI model." And then you look at well, how can I enhance this? Right? How can I ensure the accuracy of this? This is the bottom left. Now, you know the IT team is working on basically refining and testing. Right? How do I make sure this actually works in practice? You have this kind of virtuous cycle that kind of unfolds. Now I describe that in you know three or four minutes. It's obviously a little bit more complex than that, but this is the general roadmap. That you're going to want to follow, and I would say, from a data management perspective, focusing on step one and step two there is incredibly critical to success here. Now. It is my personal belief that we are going to see progress being made here. These sorts of conversations, this question around kind of data management across semi and unstructured data, has been one of the largest questions that we're getting, particularly from advanced companies across the last eighteen months or so. And so I'm very confident that you're going to see real material improvements broadly across the marketplace in this space across the next couple of years, which is what is driving kind of our our next prediction here. Which is, you know, as we play out to the year twenty thirty now, so so kind of four years from now, we are going to see, you know, more and more agents come online. We're going to see more and more AI capabilities, you know, really kind of infiltrate all of business to include sourcing and procurement, and we believe that by twenty thirty, you're going to see twenty percent. Of procurement professionals occupying new roles driven by AI, really requiring the CPO or broadly kind of the procurement leader, if you will, to adapt their talent strategies and upskill their team members. Now let's break this one down, right? So basically, in the story, we're saying, okay, we need to focus on data. It's a hard challenge, but it's not insurmountable. But as we start to overcome, you know, the challenges there. We're gonna have to pivot to kind of the people component, right? And this has been largely I think an ignored conversation out there in the market. It's one that we're we're consciously trying to change with our clientele because even though AI is you know all about kind of automating different use cases, the human being is still a a critical source of competitive differentiation for our organizations. We can't ignore that. So I want to give you maybe a bit of a frame of reference for. How to think about kind of this this human side here, and how to think about you know adapting talent strategies and also upskilling team members here. To kind of get into this. I want to start with giving everyone a bit of a frame of reference, for how we think about the role of both, you know, the human and the AI models or the AI agents. Okay, I'll say this: when you look at the work human beings do today. It can largely fit into one of two buckets, right? So there is work that we do that I would call pattern-based work, right? So this type of work follows rules, it follows norms, it follows institutionalized ways of working, if you will. Right. There's typically you know policies and procedures and SOPs that exist to drive pattern-based work. The lower you are in an organization, typically you're going to have more pattern-based work that you do. But there's another work type that we we are another kind of bucket of work if you will that human beings also you know support and that is judgment-based work. This work doesn't follow rules, it doesn't follow norms, it doesn't follow patterns, right? It requires a human being to to effectively make a call. So think, you know, responding to COVID, think, um, responding to geopolitical, you know, uncertainty, think, responding to, you know, all of the things, all of the Black Swan events that we seem to be living through, what feels like, you know, every three to six months these days. Okay, so we have these two work buckets. We have kind of pattern based work and judgment based work. Now we believe that as we start to see AI come online, as we start to see agents infiltrate, you know sourcing and procurement to a greater degree than they are today. You're going to see that AI is largely going to take over or at least significantly augment. That middle of the page, the pattern-based work, what I'm calling here typical work, right? And it's the reason is is it's very simple, or the rationale behind this is very simple: where we understand the mathematics behind decision making. So in effect, where we know what data goes into an activity and how that data combines to produce an output that we call the task. That means in essence that we have the training database to train an AI model on how to go do that thing, how to go replicate that. But we do not see a world where the judgment based portions of our work, right? So the non-standard, the things I'm calling non-standard far left and far right hand side on this page, we do not see a world where AI significantly augments or takes over, you know that that that sort of work product. And again, the reason is very simple: there's no data to describe decision making there. Right. So so for example, there's no training database that you could have had um, you know six years to the day. Right. So six years ago to the day, we were all talking about COVID. You know, there's no training database back then to say, here's the optimal response strategy. That required human intuition, human judgment, human skills to kind of navigate. Right, and so over time, you're going to see that AI agents will take over that work, which is pattern in nature, pattern based in nature, and humans will start to slowly gravitate towards more judgment based work. Right, work that requires, true kind of human ingenuity, if you will, to respond to. Now one might immediately conclude, from this framing. That this means, we need less people, we need less humans because you might be thinking about this and saying, well, there's so much that we do in sourcing procurement today, that is pattern based in nature, and to some extent, you know, I, I, I agree with that, but but in to to to from another perspective, I actually kind of disagree with that, and I want to maybe give you some talking points and maybe a frame of reference, and also maybe let's just call it an argument. As to why we might actually need more people into the future, okay, and it really boils down to this idea that. As AI starts to impact the economy, you know more and more across the next few years, we're going to see two things happen. We're going to see the pace of business rapidly accelerate, and we're going to see as a result the total volume of work increase tremendously. Okay, so let me let me kind of break this down. So prior to technology. Um, there was a huge distance between what we would call ideas and actions. And if you look at kind of like where work comes from, like like for example, where does all the stuff you do today actually come from, or where does all the stuff that your employees do today actually come from? Well, what happens is someone within your organization has an idea, and eventually that idea needs to get actioned. Right, and when those two things happen, someone has an idea and it gets actioned, a work event is born. Right, that's actually how work is created. Now prior to technology, the distance between ideas and action was actually quite long. Right, like like someone had to come up with an idea. Manually, they had to turn that idea over manually. They had to, you know, critique, refine, massage, you know, refine that idea before it could get to an actionable state manually. And it took it took quite a long time, right? And this is why. You know, with the advent of you know the internet computers, it felt like the pace of business has accelerated. So if we look at kind of where we're at today, you know, with technology, we have tools, we have platforms, we have. You know, the ability to basically truncate the distance between ideas and actions. I mean, look at what we're doing right now. There's, you know, a thousand of you on this webinar. I'm talking to you into this little microphone over this thing we call the internet about ideas. We're refining those ideas in real time. I'm seeing questions come in about those ideas. We're massaging, we're tailoring, we're tweaking those ideas in kind of real time, and that allows us to get to an actionable place. Right, far faster, and so what's happened? Well, the pace of business has accelerated, and it's actually increased the total amount of work that we do. I mean, no one would say that we do less work today than we did thirty years ago. Because we have technology, if anything, it's the opposite. We do more work today, because we have technology because it closes the distance between ideas and actions. Okay, now with AI. It's going to be like pouring gasoline on the fire, right? We not only have a tool that can help us to refine, polish, and you know turn our ideas over, but we also have a tool that can help us potentially come up with new ideas in the first place, right? And so again, we're going to see this paradigm shift. We're going to see the pace of business tremendously accelerate. And we're going to see the total volume of work that we do as employees within companies also increase. In some ways, I would say we're living through this. Right, I mean, one of the things that you know we've written a lot about across the last few years is is this idea of cognitive overload. Like, how do we shield our teams from the the cognitive kind of requirements of just like rapid change and mass change at scale across the last few years? And so I would argue that that a lot of us are actually kind of living through this right now. Right, and so this is a long way of saying, I see an argument. For this notion that the increase in total volume of work that we do actually keeps us at a net neutral place, or potentially even increases the need for human beings. And the reason why is because as we encounter new novel situations, as the pace of business continues to accelerate, and as we start to see new work requirements emerge, that is going to necessitate the need for someone supporting more non-standard and judgment-based work. So while you may see a net reduction in the middle of this page across the coming years, you're going to see a net increase. On the far left-hand side and the far right-hand side of this page, right, there are simply more novel situations, more novel requirements that we have to navigate as a functional area, and that is going to require human intervention to overcome. And so this is why it's really really important for everyone on this call. And really, all of the business world, to really think about our talent strategy here. And there's a few things that I want to hit on on this on this slide. So first of all, we need to be thinking about. What new skill sets matter in a world where humans are focused more on judgment than they are on pattern-based work. Because if you look at the skill sets and the competencies that we largely have across our teams today, they enable excellence at pattern-based work for the most part. Right, I'm not gonna I don't want to paint the world in black and white colors, but for the most part, most of the skill sets we you know hire for and curate and govern are related to pattern-based execution. In a world where human beings. Start to focus more and more on judgment. Those skill sets become less important. So, so the things on the right hand side where you see the declining kind of column, if you will, you know those sorts of skill sets become less important over time. So things like deductive analysis, process execution, you know, financial acumen, legal acumen, like those those things just matter less in a world where we're doing more judgment based work. Some new things become core, right? Things like agility, collaboration, strategic thinking, you know, influence, and then on the left hand side, you have this whole compendium of new skill sets. That um you know start to matter things like how do I collaborate with an AI uh you know model more effectively, am I good at design thinking? What about ethical decision making with respect to using AI models, right? And so so the first thing that we need to think about. Is, what's our plan for, upskilling here? Right? I mean, do we do we have a plan? Do do we know what kind of gaps, um, uh that we have with respect to the the current competencies that are that are kind of on our team? Um, the second thing that I would say is, you need to ask yourself, how are you going to actually train for these new skill sets that are emerging? Um, the reality is that, we have a broken. Kind of educational model around the world. So, so let me kind of get a little bit kind of philosophical here for for just a moment. If you look at how our educational systems are set up all across the world. It is based on this assumption that we send kids to school, starting at age you know between four and six, depending on kind of where you are at in the world, and then they stay in school until anywhere between age seventeen, eighteen to twenty two, twenty three again, depending on where you are at in the world and how long you stay in in school. But the assumption is that you do that. And kids are going to come out on the other side, with the skill sets and with the knowledge that they need to be successful for the next you know forty to fifty years of their career. And if you really just step back and think about that, that's an asinine proposition, that is completely disconnected to the speed at which the world is moving today. And so the question that we need to be asking, is also. Not it well, it's it's not only what new skill sets do we need, but it's also where are those skill sets going to be developed, right? Because are we you know it's kind of a hard hard thing to imagine sending people back to school, you know every five to ten years to develop new skill sets. So are we going to, you know, fill that void from a from an enterprise perspective? Are we going to partner with industry associations? Are we going to develop kind of in house curriculum? Like what is the strategy there? Because to be sure, there's going to be a new version of this slide in ten years, right? So the things on the right hand side maybe fall off the page, the things in the middle move to the right, the things on the left move to the middle, and there's a whole new set of things on the left hand side of the page. And so we need to think about well, how do we continuously educate. And that's something that you know people have been talking about for years, but it's becoming a material differentiator in today's economy, just given the pace of AI. The third and final thing that I'll say on this slide is we also need to think about how are we going to. Enable effective career progression, inside our organizations in a world that is dominated by AI. If you think about how everyone on this call, I mean just just think think about your own experiences here. How did you get to where you are at today? I'm willing to bet you know most of you would not say that they got to where they're at in their career because they sat through classroom based. You know trainings. Most people were either given or formed kind of a mentorship kind of relationship with someone, that then afforded them stretch opportunities to grow and develop. Right. And it's through those stretch opportunities that allows us to you know develop new skills and to you know just just become you know more dangerous in our profession if you will. The problem though with AI is that it's creating a bit of a disincentive for real and organic mentorship. Okay, I mean think about it this way: if you have a senior employee that has the ability to offload a portion of their work. To a junior level staff member, or they can offload that work to an AI model. Who are you going to pick? Right, one of those works twenty four seven, one of those can give you as many potential responses to your questions or to your prompts or to your requested activities as many times as you want. It doesn't sleep. You don't need to care about how you you know give it feedback. Who are you gonna pick? Right, you're obviously going to pick the AI model. And so it's we're running headfirst into this disincentive for career progression. And so one of the conversations that needs to be asked, and one of the conversations being asked at the the the most advanced companies we work with is, "How are we going to protect?" Judgment-based, or let me rephrase: How are we going to protect activities that actually build judgment-based skills for the human being? So even in instances where we could deploy AI to do something, how are we going to govern those instances where we say. Yes, AI could do this, but this is actually really critical for the human to develop good skills that will allow them to progress. That is a fundamental question. That is an incredibly important question, that collectively we need to be answering. Otherwise, we're going to run into real problems years from now related to. You know, skill set mismatches, and we're going to have a gap in kind of the career ladder, if you will. Okay, I'm doing a quick time check. I'm going to get to our third and final prediction here, which is another build, by the way, on kind of the the talent angle, and then I'll I'll open it up for Q A, because I see a lot of questions coming in. So, so our third kind of prediction here. Is that again in the year twenty thirty, we'll see AI orchestrating procurement in thirty percent of organizations. So again, this idea that we are going to see real progress across the coming years. We're going to overcome that data issue, and in in a span of you know four to five years, we're going to see real progress being made on AI orchestration. And when this happens, you know you're going to see tasks being triaged. To humans or AI agents based on unique strengths, in unique roles. Okay, so let me kind of break this down here. I want to I want to just define real quick what we mean by you know orchestration, and then I'll take you through a couple implications, and we'll open it up. So first of all, I want to quickly define a multi agent system platform for you all. This is something that I'm sure some of you have seen in the vendor kind of communities, in maybe demos that you've seen of various products, or maybe you've seen this on the roadmap of you know you know your own kind of organization. This is kind of a future state everyone's kind of marching towards. But let me kind of break this down. So in the future, we do imagine a world where human beings largely interact with the enterprise through AI systems first and foremost. So let's use a procurement example here. Let's say. That we have a human being that wants to buy something in the future, it's very likely that that human actually begins the buying process through interacting with what we call an orchestrator agent. Now, this orchestration agent will have been trained on things like the procurement policy, procurement procedures, maybe category strategies, maybe sourcing strategies, supplier management strategies. Basically, the entire context of the organization's quote unquote intelligence layer, if you will, it will have been trained or at least connected to that. And the orchestrator has the responsibilities of doing a couple things. The orchestrator first of all liaisons with the human requester to understand things like, well, what's your requirement really like? How many widgets do you need? Do you want lowest cost? Do you want highest quality? What's your lead time? So on and so forth. And then the second thing is that the orchestrator is responsible for basically kind of coordinating a number of sub agents that are that exist to basically operationalize that request. Right? So in the in the example of say. A human needing to buy something, the researcher maybe takes that in and just that that that request, and then looks at their sub agents that they have available to them and says, well maybe I need to call upon the services of a sourcing agent, maybe a negotiations agent, maybe a contracting agent, and then releases all of the goal prompts and reviews the outputs of all of those sub agents in the sequence to basically action the request. Now at the end of this journey, right, it goes back to the human. This is where you get the kind of the human in the loop, if you will. The human can review what's happened, maybe engage the services of maybe a third party agent to validate everything, a compliance agent, and you have this kind of automated kind of end-to-end workflow. This is certainly where we think we see things heading, and we do believe that by the year 2030, we're going to see some organizations deploy this at scale. Okay, now this is a simple kind of buying journey. Right, this is a very kind of narrowly cast example of a kind of a simple buying journey. What we see happening more broadly speaking across you know maybe more complex situations is the need for the procurement leader or the need for the chief procurement officer really to orchestrate autonomous procurement at scale. Right, and what this means is to think about the interactions of agents alongside the interactions of, say, humans. Right, so so we do not imagine a world where. Processes are only agents or only humans. It's really going to be a combination of both, right? Where agents are maybe passing the baton to humans based on you know requirements at a certain step of a process, and then those humans are passing it back to an agent to take up the next step of the process. And what this requires us all to think about is how do we update. Kind of our operating models, our almost org design, if you will, to reflect this new paradigm that we're entering into. So on the far left-hand side, you can see kind of these gray boxes. These are the inputs here, right? These are the design tools that we need to think about to really start to fully understand the ontology of our business. Right, so procurement leaders are going to have to think about well, how do we how do we know what processes people are actually taking on? What's our model for those processes? How are we going to design workflows? How are we going to model out decisions? Right, that gets fed into an LLM as part of this broader intelligence layer. In the blue, the light blue rather at the top of the page, you have these intelligence capabilities. Right, these models need to be connected. To things like intelligent document processing, decision intelligence platforms, other sorts of AI or machine learning kind of platforms, and then. You have these endpoints at the bottom of the page, where the output of this autonomous orchestration is being fed to various sorts of individuals, whether that's a human, whether that's a bot, whether that's an API connection somewhere, whether that's a future AI agent. But I bring this slide up, and I know it's a bit of an eye chart because there's a lot going on here. But I bring this slide up because, as we enter into this new paradigm of becoming "quote unquote" AI first, we need to become a bit more sophisticated in how we think about the procurement org chart. Right, AI models, AI agents, bots largely speaking, are going to have to take their place on the org chart and inside the operating model alongside the human being for all of this to work. Okay, and this is a again this is a conversation that we need to start having. Leaders are having right now to figure out what is the optimal design design decisions here. Right, I'll leave you with one one last kind of insight before I open this up to Q and A for the last fifteen minutes, and this is related to. Another kind of play on the talent or the human side around how we need to reimagine procurement's roles—the human roles again. So I said a few minutes ago. You know we're going to see humans focus more and more on judgment-based activities. I absolutely stand by that and I believe that's true. But I'm going to take this a step further today. I think you're going to see. The emergence of many new and kind roles to begin with. You know, so one of the things that we've seen in the data and in the research is that organizations that are deploying AI models at scale today are seeing productivity improvements at the individual level. But those productivity improvements aren't scaling to the enterprise wide level today, and the reason why we believe that's happening. Is because productivity is allowed to remain trapped in individual role design, and that needs to change for us to really become AI first. And so what I mean by that is we need to start looking at all of the roles that we have in sourcing and procurement, and we need to start evaluating those roles based on what percentage of activities and tasks does that role take on today that is innately human. Or innately AI, right? So if you look at the left hand side, I'm talking about the the evaluate roles kind of circles there. We need to take stock of what roles do we have today and what percentage of that work is actually a AI you know native or or innately human in nature, right? So pattern based or judgment based work. Then we need to think about how do we realign those tasks. Right? How do we take all of those innately human tasks and recombine them, reconfigure them? Maybe create brand new roles. Maybe we take the portion of innately human work out of a category manager, a sourcing manager, a supplier manager, and combine them into a net new title. Right, and then how do we peel out all of that innate AI work and make sure that is you know given to the agents? It's given to the models. It's given to potentially copilot, depending on what scale we're looking at here. Then we reconstitute those roles in that third step. Right, now we've separated out. Kind of these innately human roles, these innately AI roles, and we need to update all of this through our operating model on the right hand side. What I just described to you on this page is economic creative destruction in a process. Right, this notion that new technology comes online. That destroys some jobs, that destroys some requirements, some activities, but in that process creates new ones. This is that on a slide, right? And this is what leaders are focused on right now: How do we transfer productivity gains from the individual to the enterprise through role redesign. And so this is the other conversation that is happening right now in leading organizations, on the quest to get to that twenty thirty date through that prediction. I just I just kind of outlined. So with that, Tanya, I'm going to pass it over to you to maybe tee us up for the next portion of our conversation here with the Q and A, and then we can go from there. Perfect. Well, thank you so much Ryan for sharing your insights. We have time to take some questions now. Please continue to submit your questions and thoughts in the ask a speaker box, and remember to rate the session. So to submit your rating, locate the rate session link below the player. A box will open for you to select one to five stars. With five stars being the top rating, share your feedback on the insights provided in the leave for the feedback box, and click send. Before we get to the Q&A, we want to share some resources that Gartner clients have access to. If you are not already a Gartner client, please reach out to your Gartner representative to learn how you can advance your mission critical priorities. Come join us at Gartner Conference here from top Gartner experts in thought-provoking breakout sessions and get a personalized tour of the latest insights and tools at the Gartner Showcase. Discover how Gartner can help you make smarter, faster decisions and achieve your mission critical priorities. Gartner clients, be sure to contact your client service associate to register for the best event for your role. Gartner clients have access to a suite of benefits that you do not want to miss. Drive value across the business by arming yourself with the latest business and technology insights, trends, and technologies shaping the future, all personalized for your role. Connect with your Gartner representative to learn more. Also, please find a slide with recommended research hand-selected by Ryan today. If you're not already a Gartner client, please reach out to your Gartner representative on to how you can access material like this and more. Additionally, explore Gartner's sourcing and procurement core for CPOs and interactive. Diagnostic that helps direct and indirect procurement leaders access function effectiveness and advanced maturity. Use the CPO score to measure sourcing and procurement maturity, identify trends and gaps, and benchmark performance against peer-based standards. The tool delivers actionable guidance and a clear pathway to maturity, enabling CPOs. To prioritize investments aligned with strategic objectives and plan for both short and long-term transformation, visit gartner.com to learn how Gartner can help a procurement leader benchmark, prioritize, and advance. Also follow us on social media and get latest insights and trends. Plus, you can download these resources from the bottom of the page and get more Gartner insights, access additional resources, and see upcoming and on-demand Gartner webinars at Gartner.com/webinars. Please reach out to your Gartner representative to take advantage of these entitlements and maximize your Gartner relationship. With that, I'm going to quickly turn it over to Ryan to address the questions now. Awesome. Thank you, Tanya. Um, so there's a number of questions here. I'm gonna. Us to get through as many as I possibly can in the next ten minutes. So, first question: How do we manage employee fear associated with AI investment? This is a this is a great question. It's one that I think. Everyone should be asking if they're not asking it already. We do get this question quite often. So, so to me, it boils down to two couple things. One, it's it's similar to what I what I said a few slides ago related to. There's a strong argument to be made that. There's a real need for more humans in a world that's moving faster because there's more judgment-based work to go around, and so I think first of all, explaining the roadmap of where we see procurement going is is a critical starting point, kind of painting that vision, if you will, for the staff population because right now a lot of the conversation is all about. What are we going to automate? What are we going to automate? What are we going to automate How much of the agentic AI models are being used for direct material procurement, including strategic sourcing and discrete manufacturing product bill of materials? Please share specific examples. I have seen use cases for several indirect procurement. And then the question kind of cuts off there. How do I want to respond to this given the short amount of time? So, so we've seen AI being used broadly speaking across direct and indirect. We I wouldn't say. The delineating difference or the extent to which AI is being used is driven more based off of data availability than it is off of is this a direct spend or is this an indirect spend. In terms of specific examples and use cases, I don't know that we necessarily have to get have the time to kind of get into that today. But off the you know just an attempt to give you an immediate response. There, the vast majority of the use cases that we've that I would say are quote unquote real that are producing kind of tangible ROI. Are typically in the going to be in the contract management space. They are going to be in the spend analytics space. You've seen some autonomous negotiations technologies out there for tail spend type requirements. That's probably straddling both the direct and indirect lines there. Um, are going to be the kind of the places that we start. The the the more piloting you know sorts of use cases are around kind of the orchestration, there are around kind of full RFX automation, there are around kind of the end end kind of autonomous sourcing if you will, um. Another question here: Should we build or buy AI tools? Leaders today are taking a dual pronged kind of approach to this. There seems to be. Um, uh, uh, within kind of advanced organizations, a mindset of let's let's both try and build and buy to see kind of where this shakes out. I do think there's a an argument to be made that says, you know, if you build the AI models or if you build the AI use cases yourself in collaboration with the you know CIO or your IT teams, you are always going to have. Better contextual information to feed those models. Now the downside of that is it you know sometimes costs more, it's more complicated to manage. You know unless you're set up to to really handle that, it can be hard to kind of govern you know the the creation and management of an AI use case to that scale like that. Whereas you know if you buy an AI tool, sometimes you get access to you know more market related contextual knowledge. So maybe it's not as specific to your organization and how you do business, but maybe you tap into some external sources, which is valuable. So there's no one size fits all answer to that. I would say it depends on your goals, right? So if it's kind of like a, it's similar to make versus buy, right? If you view the use case as part of your competitive differentiation as a firm, to me that's a signal to potentially think about building a use case. If you see it as, you know, something that maybe. Maybe you would um you know outsource traditionally then then I think it's it's probably okay to to think about you know buying but it's it's hard to give a complete kind of response to that because there's a lot of variables that go into play but I would say think about what are you trying to do is a competitive differentiation through that use case or is it more of an efficiency play if it's a deficiency play it's probably going to be okay to outsource um. All right. Next question here. I see negotiation in the declining trend for new competency start. Please explain. Yes, this is a great one. So the rationale behind that, and we went back and forth on this for for for many many months on where do we place that. The reason behind that is because negotiation and to some extent is math. Right, there has been plenty of research written on how to negotiate. You have game theory, you know a whole field studying that. You have, you know, whole Harvard business, you know, curriculums based around negotiation strategy, if you will. The mathematics around you know what negotiation is and how to do it is largely. Is largely defined. Now, when I say math, I don't necessarily mean numbers necessarily, but I mean you know the the the relational concepts between like what is happening when negotiation takes place, and because that has been largely defined, that means that AI can do it. We are already seeing that we're seeing negotiation chatbots come online. We're seeing autonomous negotiation solutions come online that can actually negotiate with another human being, or if you want to take this a step further, can negotiate with another AI agent. And and just think about the possibilities of what happens when you have two models negotiating against one another. You basically start to create the conditions for dynamic contracts, real time updates to contracts, infinite permutations of negotiations that far exceed whatever the human could do. And so in a world where that starts to happen, we do believe that that becomes a declining human skill set. It's not I'm not saying it's not important, um but it becomes something that. Declines in importance. Next question: In the autonomous procurement, oh, no one just where to go. In the autonomous procurement orchestration model, what are the use cases for human interaction? The way that I would answer this is: the human interaction belongs in the space where judgment is required. Right, that's the simplest answer that I can give you. It is it is in those places where the organization deems we don't have a mathematical equation defined well enough to say this is the prescribed kind of a RPA esque, if you will, way that we're going to handle this. A call needs to be made. In those situations, the human has to be in a loop. Um, Albert asks, "How much process standardization matters in training an AI model to perform a task? How to deal with exceptions in the standard process? How to deal with non-standardized process?" Um, so a couple questions in there. So, how much standardization matters. Um, is really a cost conversation at the end of the day. So you you can you know you can connect AI models to you know incredibly unstructured data sources, and um, it'll interpret it right. Like you, for example, you can connect an AI model to YouTube and it can pull information out of YouTube, and you know you you can action that right. It's a very unstructured data source, and it can still kind of infer like what's going on. But the thing we have to contend with is. The token economics of that, right? How much is it going to cost the model from a token perspective to effectively make meaning out of the unstructured data, right? And and and there's going to be a tipping point where. The cost of having a model sift through unstructured data sources is so great that using AI for that use case doesn't make a whole lot of sense. Like it would be cheaper to employ a human to go do that effectively. Right, and so so the question of how much process standardization matters, I would say it matters from the perspective of cost. Right, the more standardized your processes are, the more semi or structured your data sources become. Therefore, it's cheaper to actually deploy the models. How to deal with exceptions? Oh, where'd the question go? Flying around, how to deal with exceptions in the standard process. Again, that goes into kind of your business process mining. You want to have those situational ambiguities really well defined. The if this, then that's of a process as defined as possible. And then how to deal with non-standardized process. To me, if it's truly a situation that deserves a non-standardized process, that's a situation that requires human intervention, human judgment. Right, and and that that is an innately human task, and so I would say at this point in time, really don't even think about using AI for that. Now the exception to that is, I do believe there's a lot that we do today. That is pretty standardized in someone's mind. It's just not written down on paper anywhere. Right? That's where the the whole tribal knowledge kind of comes into play. All right. I'm going to try and fly through, or try to get to kind of one other question here. Let me just see. Um. So Nick, Nick asked, "Many of the ways that newer professionals are hired and trained is through completion of pattern-based work. How do we set up a training pipeline in the future to get new hires to have an understanding of the basic structure of what we do before they are asked to make judgment calls?" I pick this question because I think I love this question. This is so important to me. There's this rhetoric out there that basically says, entry level work becomes judgment based work. Right? Like you know, in an AI first paradigm, we just eliminate entry level roles and we just start them at you know the judgment based level. Again, I think that's an insane proposition. For the reasons Nick outlined, right? You need pattern based like how you build judgment is through the execution of pattern based work, right? That's how you you know develop wisdom. That's how you develop good judgment to make a call. To me, the answer to this has to be. Us evaluating what tasks and activities actually develop good judgment, and then protecting those for the human. A great case study, and I'll leave everyone with this: a great case study in this is what happened when the Da Vinci was invented. So the Da Vinci is a surgical robot that can help you know with like laparoscopic surgeries. Well, when that came out, some hospital systems saw that the head surgeon. During surgery, started to outsource activities to the DaVinci in not the surgical residents, and it was very quickly they started to realize if we don't protect those surgical residents' ability to actually participate in certain aspects of the surgery, we're going to run out of a pipeline for head surgeons in a few years. Right, and so so they basically started to carve out and said, "Hey, we know this robot can do a portion of the surgery, but we're not going to let it because we need the human to develop that skill." Or really develop good judgment through that skill, so that they can become the head surgeon later, right? So with that, I know we're at time. I want to be respectful of that. Tanya, I'm going to pass it back over to you. I know there's dozens more questions that I didn't quite get to. Please reach out to you know your account executive or Gartner Rittlard. We're happy to get to all of these. But Tanya, I'm going to pass it back over to you to wrap up. Perfect. Thank you so much Ryan for sharing such amazing insights. And before you all go, just a quick reminder: you can access additional resources at the bottom of the page. Please read this session and share feedback on the insights provided. So, to submit your rating, locate the rate session link below the player. A box will open for you to select one to five stars. Please note that five stars is the top rating. Share your feedback on the insights provided in the leave for the feedback box, and click send. Alright, with that, I'd like to thank our presenter, and of course, whether you are new to Gartner or one of our existing clients, thank you for joining us today. I hope you all have a great day. Goodbye. Ryan Polk Gartner procurement CPO agentic AI supplier multitier.
