Okay. Rajesh Kandaswamy Gartner CIO IT 2030 democratization North Star reskilling. Hello, and welcome to this Gartner webinar: IT 2030: How CIOs Should Re Invent IT for the AI Age. Your task is driving stronger performance on your organization's mission-critical priorities. To do that, you need trusted guidance that provides clarity, not just information. At Gartner, we deliver that clarity by combining forward-looking insights from our twenty-five hundred experts with rigorous proprietary research methodologies. Our perspective is uniquely informed by our hands-on work with five hundred thousand client interactions across every major function, geography, industry, and sector. We don't just provide the business and technology insights. We work with you to apply them, equipping your team with practical tools and expert guidance to achieve your goals. So whether you are new to Gartner or one of our existing clients, today you will get actionable, objective insights through an inhuman intelligence to help you move forward with confidence. I'm Robert, your moderator for this session. Before we get started, I have a few tips to enhance your webinar experience. Here are rules of engagement for watching this session. We'll pause for a moment to give you time to review them. Around the video player, you'll find a variety of ways to interact with the session. We encourage you to participate by clicking the Ask a Speaker box to submit your questions and thoughts about this program. You can submit a question anonymously, or if you choose, your name, title, and company can be visible along with your question. Navigate to the bottom of the page to download additional resources. About this program, you can rate the session and share feedback. To submit your rating, locate the rate session link below the player. Boxes open up using the one to five hearts. Please note that five hearts is the top rating. Share your feedback on the insights provided in the leave for the feedback box and then click send. This webinar is being recorded. You can watch this presentation again. Find more insights on demand at gartner.com/slash/webinars. Now I'd like to welcome Gartner's distinguished vice president analyst Rajesh Kandaswamy. Rajesh, thanks for joining us, and now I'll turn it over to you. Thank you, Robert. Hello, everyone. Thank you for taking some time to spend with us. IT 2030. This is our topic. CIOs and technology leaders worldwide are all wondering: more than delivering AI for business, should they be reinventing IT itself for the AI age? Some of you are already working on a plan. Some of you are considering, and some of you are asked by the board. To address this, me and a few of my colleagues started putting together research at the end of last year, and since the time, we have taken feedback from many of you, who have been gracious with your input, to shape this presentation. Let's jump right in. So, as we all know, AI is a powerful force. And I think we can all agree that while there are many different forces that can impact IT, and here are some: geopolitics, economic activity, and so there could be others that impact IT. I think we can all agree AI is the fundamental, powerful force that is going to reshape IT. And when we talk to many of you, we see that there are three big areas why this question becomes important. One is AI-driven efficiencies. We can all see that because of AI, the ability to build technology is getting easier. It might not be as much as some people in the media or in the tech industries portrayed to be. But there is benefit, whether it's in building code, or managing IT. So based on that, will the IT organization in the future be smaller or bigger? Second, we all see increased interest from business wanting to build their own technology. We call it democratization. This used to have a negative connotation a few years ago, with shadow IT. I'm sure most of you are familiar with shadow IT. When the worry was rampant technology use that is done without guardrails in business ends up impacting IT. But now, democratization is on a forward march. No code agent builders, wipe coding. These type of tools are enabling business to build more. And the third one is. Because of the ability to use AI directly, or use AI to build code, we have a new question. Should I increase my build mix versus buy compared to before? I'll give an example. A few months ago, a CIO of a large global bank asked me, "Rajesh, I have this big fat check that I am about to sign for a large enterprise software vendor." Hundreds of millions of dollars. I'm not sure if we should sign it. Why? One, I don't know what all AI is going to change. Second, this vendor is telling everybody on Wall Street that they are getting twenty thirty percent efficiency because of AI, but I'm not seeing my bill go down twenty thirty percent. And lastly, I don't even use everything that they're buying from them. We use only a part. So this is what I am thinking, Rajesh. She said, "Should I get a set of developers from my team and ask them to build parts of the software?" Using Claude Code or other, you know coding tools, and then use it, and then instead of me maintaining it, turn the whole thing to open source. This was in September, even before we saw the market trash software stocks. So CIOs are grappling with these questions: How will impact the future of IT? So we looked deep into that, and then what we realized is that there are a set of things that need to be considered. This is not a trivial exercise. We all know how hard transformation programs are that you work on. So in this presentation, we wanted to offer you three things that are the outcome of that research. The first is, what is the future state that you should aim for? What is that North Star? We developed a few models. We call them archetypes to help you bring through that. Second, what is the level of reskilling, or job changes you will have to consider for people in your team? And it's not just deciding on the level of changes. What is the right pace for you? Some of you might want to be AI first and go all in, but at the other extreme, some of you want to be really cautious. That's understandable based on the nature of the industry. And third, we will look into the implication to the tech stack itself. So these are the three areas that we are going to look into as part of this presentation, and we have much more research on this. So now, to look into the future state model. What we see is it's important to consider three different factors. One, supply itself. Because of AI-driven efficiency, we see that more can be done with the same number of people or less. Second, what is your business telling you about demand in the future? Not just based on how business is today, but what are their aspirations for business? Will they be investing in new markets? Will they want to increase margin, improve customer service? Based on that, what is the trajectory? And these two used to be somewhat standard when we match demand and supply. But the third factor is very important now: democratization, the ability of business to build technology. What is the appetite in your business? So when you use these three factors and then determine what are the models that are possible, we find there are four key archetypes that are important for you to consider, and we offer you to them. So what you see on the left is the demand, supply, and then the democratization. Notice supply has got two elements: number of people and the units of work being delivered. They are not exactly the same. The belief is because of AI, you can deliver more with the same number of people or less, but how much more it depends on your appetite. The first archetype is what we call lean IT. Here, the demand is more or less the same, but the expectation is IT can be more efficient with AI, and can the size of IT can go somewhat smaller than it is today. There are organizations who to whom I presented this that clearly say, "Yes, you know, my CEO or my board expects me to be lean IT," or "We are owned by a private equity firm that is expecting us to proceed that way." Some of you tell us that you are seeing demand increase, but there is no appetite to increase headcount in IT. Through AI-driven efficiencies, you want to match the demand. This is amplified IT. Some of you tell us that you know we are seeing significant demand. But there is no appetite to increase IT. Yes, we do want IT to deliver more, but we expect some of the demand to be satisfied directly by business. We call this democratized IT. And some of you say that we are seeing significant potential for technology across. We want to build more. In fact, technology is so critical, we might reduce our buy solutions and build somewhat more using AI tools. So we want business to become more adept in building technology, but we also want to invest in IT to deliver more technology. Because everybody builds, we call it the dual builder IT. So take a look at this. In terms of these four archetypes, this is not a progression. It is not unnecessarily one has to go from one to the other. There might be a couple of places where some might consider, you know, why we are amplified? We want to go to democratize. That's okay. Some might say we are democratized. We want to go to dual builder. That's okay. But it's not a natural progression. Think about what do you think is the model that suits you, and also think about what does your CEO think the model that is needed for your organization. And how do you determine that? There are two factors to keep in mind. If the transformation that you expect to do because of AI is fundamentally only in technology, these two models are fine. But if the model has to address changes on the business side as well, the other two models—democratized and dual builder—come to the fore. The other way to look at this also is depends on how vital is technology to your business. Everybody says technology is important. That's not the issue. But in some places, it's much much more important to be stable, not risk unnecessarily. Stability triumphs innovation in those places. We tend to see lean and amplified IT. And in the middle, this is where we expect most of you to be. It is you are investing in technology to make use of the opportunities. Which is common, but then there is a subset of you for whom technology is critical. What do I mean by that? In these companies, if a competitor or a new entrant introduces a technology-based product, and that can impact you or your business. Then you fit in that category. Okay, we expect most to be in the middle, but the idea is, you identify what suits you. As I mentioned earlier, there is no one-size-fits-all, and there is not really only one good one. Not everybody needs to be dual builder. So think about your situation. And the most important thing is this: this is really important to pay attention. Is all the work that we see now, lot in the IT departments, is focused on how IT can do better in the AI world. But we are dangerously underinvesting in the planning that's required to take care of the technology that is going to be built outside technology, outside the IT department. So how do you go about this? Start with business, have conversations with them to determine whether the demand is expected to be more. Work with your business partners to determine what is the model that is required. And what we are urging is, while you are investing in AI, it is time to take a deliberate step, to determine what is the future state model for you in IT, and set that as the North Star. And that will enable you to plan the rest of the IT changes required, for your organization to thrive in AI age. So you've taken a look at this. Now we wanted to get your view on this, based on what I have shared, these four archetypes. Which of these archetypes is closest to what you think your organization will need in the future? Robert, can we kick the poll on? Absolutely, thank you so much, Rajesh. Our poll is now open, and we'd like to know what you are thinking. You should see the poll now pop up right over the slides in case you can't see the poll on your screens. Please refresh your browser window once the poll is visible. Simply select the answer of your choice and click submit. And then once we close the poll, you'll be able to see the final results in the video player. And please continue to enter your questions into the speaker box. Rajesh looks like we're getting a lot of votes coming in now. Um, I can read them out for you right now. It's um, let me sorry, three. Let me about forty three percent. Yeah. So let me spend thirty seconds while people are voting to read, you know, explain the four archetypes again, just to refresh your mind as you vote. Number one is for situations when you expect the demand to be more or less the same, but you want to get more done with less IT resources—lean IT. Number two in amplified IT, you expect some more demand, but there is no appetite to increase IT's resources. But you want to deliver more and be more efficient. Number three is democratizing IT: further increase in demand, but no increase in IT resources, but somewhat more capacity with AI. But business does some more work with democratization. Number four is dual builder IT. Here is the highest level of demand, and the organization starts to work and think like a tech company and building more rather than buying. There is capacity to increase across the board. Hopefully all had a chance chance to vote. Robert, is the vote stopping to trickle down? Yeah, it looks like it's it's kind of slowing down right now. I'll close it in just a minute because you'll see some votes still coming in. But right now it is looking like, number three democratized IT is in lead with about forty two percent, and second is number two Amplified IT with thirty five percent. The votes are now really slowing down. So I'm just going to close the poll for everyone to see and bring up those final results. And as you can see, a three democratized IT is at top with forty-one percent, and then amplified IT with thirty-five, four dual builder is at ten percent, and then lean IT is at eight, and then I don't know is at bottom at six percent. Excellent. First, thank you all for if you don't if you don't mind showing the results for a little bit. So people can digest the results. So, thank you all for participating in the poll. So, there are certain things that stand out. One, democratized IT being number one with Amplified Not Too Far is what we do see in our conversations as well. And so your output matches what we are seeing. And then notice the democratization, this element of business building our own technology. If that is the most prevalent one, the question becomes: Are we spending enough time and effort to really get ready for that, across enablement, across governance, and the tools, and all of that? And notice one more thing in the poll: It's only six percent said "I don't know." So ninety-four percent of you have some idea about the future state. Hopefully, that's aligned with your executives. So now the question is: If you have a clear idea of the future, do you have a deliberate plan to get there, and what are the things to put in place to initiate that plan and progress over time? That's the thing to consider. So we can take the poll of Robert. Thank you all for participating again. Now let us look into the next area. Which is transforming the workforce itself. So we identify the North Star on the workforce side. There are few things to keep in mind. One, in the last year symposium, we shared that you know one fifth of the work is done with some help of AI, but you expect all the IT work is going to use some AI in the next few years. But how will that automation be? What will be the collaboration be? One of my colleagues, Kabe, and her team worked really wonderful work in this area to really identify how much human AI collaboration is possible in different areas of IT. And it's not simple just replacing. They use a five-point scale. At the lowest end of the scale is when you are using AI on the site. If I'm a developer, I am using an AI chatbot on the site to generate snippets of code. I copy, paste, and use. But at the middle level, is when I am using AI for specific tasks. The same developer using AI to generate a set of test scripts, run test scripts, generate documentation. That is middle level of automation, and at the highest level, it is across the board. Now, in the same instance, in SDLC, it is not only in development, but it's also in design, putting the code in testing and testing, etc. Now, how much of this automation is possible, and more importantly, what is a speed that's suitable for you? The speed for somebody in a technologically advanced company is not the same as somebody who is not. Be identified three levels of speed that you can think about. One, certain companies are very cautious. Caution is more paramount than innovation. Some companies are opportunistic. They take the opportunity when business is investing in AI, to make any IT enhancements. And third, are organizations that are AI first, they make deliberate and proactive investments in IT, without aligning to business to get ready for the AI age. So think about what is suitable for you. And when you think that, what we see is, across the different areas within IT that you see here. The level of automation that's possible for you varies. If you are an AI-first company, the level of automation that's possible for you can be quite high in an area like software development or an enterprise applications, but not an IT core. But notice the level of automation that's possible in software engineering by 2030. Four point eight out of five. But it's not just automation. There is a level of reskilling that's required. In some areas, it's significant: software engineering and data. And what we see is in some areas, the headcount actually trending. We get these questions: "But Rajesh, won't AI impact headcount in these areas?" But what we see is in software engineering and cybersecurity. As of now, based on the technologies we see coming. The efficiencies that you gain, while it reduces the demand, it also creates more additional work that can be satisfied, so there is more demand. And as of now, CIOs across the board are experiencing increased demand. But if you take a cautious approach, not AI first, what appears in orange is possible for you. The level of automation may not be as much as AI first, but it's still quite a bit. But notice one area, one line: cybersecurity. Even if you take a cautious approach, you will need to make a level of investment to automate. Because you are not fully in control of your destiny, it depends on bad actors trying to, you know, do bad things to you. So you need a level of investment for automation. Otherwise, it's hard to keep up. I know this is a busy slide. My apologies. There is much more detail behind it. We understand that the transformation that needs to occur at each of these levels is immense, and so this covers that. So, I just mentioned it. In some areas, there is efficiency, but there is also increased demand. Software engineering and cybersecurity stand out. That is on the skills and the people side. But how do they work? This is an important element that's emerging now. Tiny teams. And in the age before AI, say whether it is in ERP or mobile, we used to have this concept of big program teams. We knew what we wanted to achieve. We knew an instinct for the technology, build a large program, achieve it. ERP, core banking, supply chain, internet—all of them were like that. But AI is not like that. There is no clear in-state in AI. Right? Do we all know the in-state in AI for your organization? For most of the people I speak with, they don't. But we all know which way to go. Though it's like kind of running in a race versus running in one direction. In either case, you need to train. Either case, you need shoes. Though in race, you know the destination, but in some cases, you don't. You still need these other things. So now. What organizations are doing is they are building these small, tiny teams in part of AI without necessarily having a large program team. Let me give an example. A payroll company that I speak with. They get all these requests from their customers. On Wednesday, they may get a request for a payroll to be done over the weekend, saying, "Hey, Lucy did not work thirty hours. She worked forty-two hours. Can you make a change?" This might come by email. And these emails are in different shapes and forms. They used to have a human handling all this. What they did was they built an AI-based agent. The agent will process the email, identify what needs to be done, extract the data, check internal systems, validate it, check with the human whether that's the right action, and then make the change. Great. The customers are very happy because this is faster and more efficient. The company is happy because it's cheaper. Now, what did this company do is after that they identified that this use case is not repeatable everywhere. But the under there is an underlying pattern. The pattern is about processing an email, extracting the data, validating it, checking with the human, and then making the transaction. That's the same in customer service, sales enablement, and other areas in the company. So they took that pattern and made it as a platform. Supported by a very small team in technology, that will work with one or two people in business in different areas, and here is the kicker, and will proactively identify opportunities to make that change. This is how we see AI-based transformation today: find a new way to use AI where it used to be done differently. Uncover the underlying pattern, create a platform, and then go methodically apply it everywhere. Instead of one large team, that's what people are doing. So the key is to ensure there is an underlying platform, and supported by a tiny team. Might be one or two developers, one or two business people, but this is vital. That developer just doesn't say, "I will do only developer." They stretch themselves. They might do database work. They might do testing work. The business person might be one designing the UI, might be one using user acceptance testing. So tiny teams are this emerging concept. This is not easy for most organizations to absorb. Many of you have been working to simplify your teams. Some of you rolled out product teams. That's great. But agents are not about products; they are about process. So this is being needs to be addressed. Let's play this movie out. What happens if tiny teams take hold more and more? Tiny teams operate mostly at the you know the lower levels of the organization where work actually gets done. And tiny teams have one or two people with the help of AI to get stuff done, right? So over time, then you end up with a structure like diamonds instead of pyramids. And then at the bottom, the tiny teams use AI to get work done, whether in your organization or in your service provider. A key question that comes to leaders is: Are we ready to make the change? And second, when we think about this change, if the bottom level becomes narrow. How do we ensure we are grooming tomorrow's leaders? That's something to think about. So the key takeaway in this is the this area is this. We looked at the skill changes and that needs to be addressed at a function, you know, at a job level. Second, it's not only about the skills; it's also about the tiny teams and thinking what suits your organization. So we looked at that. There is much more detail on that area. We have heat maps and and whatnot to help you go through the planning. Now the last one is on the technology stack itself. Before I do this, so let me ask a question on democratization. We spoke about democratization, business building, software. So we wanted to run one more poll by you. Um, Robert, can you kick the poll? Yeah. So we welcome your participation in this poll. Democratization is the concept that I mentioned: is when business starts to build more technology, using web coding, no code agent builders, and whatnot. You have a cloud cowork or something else. In some organizations, you are actively promoting this as a key strategy. You might even have platforms and guardrails in place. Might not be perfect, but you have a clear strategy. In some organizations, you are experimenting in some areas. Either it could be, say, within IT, it could be in some areas of business. You might have just some tools, so you are encouraging it actively, but in some parts. In some organizations, you are allowing it, but with a clear enterprise approach. For instance. When Microsoft rolls out Microsoft Copilot, your people have ability to build agents. So you might have allowed it without a clear strategy. That's an example. Some organizations you're actively limiting it, not that you want to limit it forever, but right now you're being cautious. In some organizations, you've been worried about things like shadow IT and the risk is so much, or you might have been burnt before with shadow IT, so you're actively discouraging it. Where do you fall in this? Let's take our 30 seconds to answer that. Robert, tell me when you have the numbers are trickling down. Absolutely will do. Again, the poll should have popped up on your screen. So please select your answer, and then, in case you don't see it, please refresh your screen, and that will be able to show up. And then click submit again when you have your answer. We'll close the poll in just a moment for everyone to see the results. All right, looks like still going pretty strong there. So, and please continue to keep your questions coming in for the audience. So I think we can. Close it out right about right about now, just for everyone to kind of take a look and see. So here we go, and we'll present the results. And here you are. So what we're seeing is right now it's number two. We are encouraging encouraging it selectively in specific areas thirty three percent, and then we're allowing it but without a clear enterprise approach twenty four percent. That's tied. With we are cautious, and limiting it due to risk and governance concerns, also twenty four percent, and then we are actively promoting it, it's a key strategy with platforms and guardrails in place, that sixteen percent, and then the last three percent is we are actively discouraging it. I'll hand it back over to you. Yeah, this is quite interesting. As you can see, democratization is taking hold. Only three in three percent say they are actively discouraging it. This was not the case with Shadow IT a few years ago. I'm sure we can all agree that if we had done this poll five years ago, the three percent would have been much higher. So AI is definitely a change in mindset about people wanting to use technology. And as you can see, the you know the pretty much every other option is about having democratization in some fashion, and this supports this aspect of what you all told us in the first call. With with support for like an amplified and democratization, so this is something to really keep in mind. Thank you all for answering there, and I notice that like you know we haven't addressed any questions so far since we are nearly at the halfway mark. Robert, maybe I can address a few questions before I spend time on the technology section. Absolutely. So question came in. Sorry, yeah, question came in about controlling risk. A question is like older days. Microsoft Access produced shadow IT solutions. How do you embrace AI but control AI code, creating further shadow IT applications? Yeah, this is um, this this not an first. There is not an easy answer. What we find is in this age, saying no, it's not as much possible because democratization is taking hold and there is a new generation of technologies and new generation. There is more adapted technology. The question becomes: How do you balance governance and enablement at the same time? One, what we find is IT has got a significant role compared to their role during the age of shadow IT. AI, most organizations or most people do not fully have an exact understanding of it. It's not one technology, and it's hard to put a finger. And this problem is worse outside IT. So first, the part of the answer is: How do you control the risk? First, we believe that IT needs to have an enablement function to help business achieve democratization. How do you do that? Putting some clear controls. Some organizations have identified and curated tools for specific people in business, and as they show proficiency, can do more. Some organizations have created like you know those type of no code or like you know agent sandboxes where people can build. In some places, where they start thinking about which business capability that you want to promote democratization more. So the key answer to you is: How do you balance the risk? You identify where you can allow and where you're going to benefit from democratization, while you can control risk in doing it that way, rather than only looking at it as a tool enablement issue. That's what we see. Excellent. Another question that came in was actually similar to that. What advice would you have for the CIO whose teams in the last three years unfortunately earned the department of no perception of the business? You know, what's the most critical rotation in your view? Getting in in your view, getting in front of the AI challenge. Did you sort of cover that in that last answer? Would you want to expand specifically on this? I can specifically expand on this. So this is important. I think one, it is vital to signal the changed behavior. Clearly, the nature of the question itself shows that there is an intent to change. I would follow that up with specific signals. For example, maybe you might want to consider providing a No Code Agent Builder farm to a subset of business people. Maybe you simplify some process. One AI leader told me to build that to create that behavior. What he did was he worked really hard to simplify the vendor management process in their organization. He said it used to take eight months. Eight months in the AI world. Want to say, for example, one of the most popular technologies is AI agents. He didn't even know about AI agents this type of AI agents 15 months ago, so eight months is unacceptable. He worked hard to change from a assessment based system to a rating based system. That showed business that you know the people from IT really want to work with us. So you'd want to signal things like that and then build more and more structure into democratization. Hope that helps. Any other questions? That's big. Do you have time for one more, or should we go? Yeah, we have a couple more if we have time, or we can. Yeah, we can go forward. Yeah, this one may be too a little bit broad. But are there any? Are there differences by industry in what you're seeing? For which archetypes are more prevalent? Yes, the industry so normally typically tends to be a very very broad term. There are some signals. One, in organizations where there is higher regulatory risk. The nature of dual builder might be somewhat less, other than in certain pockets, because of the regulatory, like you know, compliance needs that makes it a little harder to achieve full dual builder. There is some democratization, but not full dual builder. In some organais, so that's in certain industries like you know such as banking in certain set of sectors of healthcare. We might we see, but doesn't mean they fully ignore it. In some places, they identify certain areas for dual builder and democratization within those organizations and embrace it there with sufficient guardrails. In some of, well you know, but the interesting thing that we have observed is. Overall, there is a shift towards more democratization and dual builder compared to a few years ago. Even say like I've had conversations with certain public sector companies or highly regulated healthcare companies that want to look at like you know what are the places in the organizations I can do a democratize. Maybe not full organization, maybe some parts. That's what we are seeing. I can take one or two more. Robert, more question. Okay, another question that came in. I'd like to know what would be the ROI for agentic AI in a highly regulated environment. The cost savings are no good when there's a risk of the agent going wrong. Yes, rogue agent is a problem, agent sprawl is a problem, orphaned agents are a problem. There are quite a few problems in that area. The ROI is not necessarily only based on whether the industry is regulated or not. It really depends on the strength of the use case. There are some traps to avoid: one, trying to automate a process that is inefficient and lacks clarity or has bad data. The temptation is using agents to automate a process that's inefficient. Ironically, agents work better when the process has clarity and the data is clean. I'll repeat that again. Well, the belief is agents can solve inefficient processes. Ironically, agents work best when the process is clarity and the data is clean. So that is one to keep in mind. Second is, in many cases, people try to take process that exists today and think, "Can I use agents to improve?" But if the process doesn't have scale, then you don't get the benefit because of AI agents. And if there are too many exceptions, you handle those exceptions by hard coding again and again. You reach a point of diminishing returns very quickly. So the value might come in first reengineering the process for agents, not humans. Or in some cases, consolidating the process against multiple units and doing it for agents. So you'd want to consider an approach like that, but then still look to build an ROI business case, factoring in all the variable costs for agents, and then proceeding. Hope that helps. Um, done with the questions, Robert. A few more. If you wanted to continue, um, absolutely. I'll take one more and then we'll move. I'll take one more and then we'll move. Okay, one more. All right. Next question is: What happens if you do not embrace democratization? If you keep the tech folks being the ones building the solutions and business, and the business remains only users of the systems, do you fall so far behind in terms of velocity to build capabilities? It depends on the industry. It depends on situation. If you are in an industry where, you know, the possibilities because of AI and technology is high in business use, whether for your products and services, or for their everyday decision making, or working with the customer. Then relying only on technology people to build technology solutions in this age of you know cloud co work and white coding, then you might not be fully leveraging what's possible in today's world. Definitely, if that's the case, you are risking that. And what are your competitors doing? If they are embracing it, or new startups that can come and impact you are doing that, then yes, there is risk. Thank you all for the question. That's wonderful. Please keep the questions coming. We just have another five or so more minutes, and we'll have time at the end for to address any additional questions as well. So let me proceed. So the last area is on democratization, the technology stack. So we all just saw that many of you are looking at rolling democratization out, incausiously or putting processes in place. But overall, democratization is of interest to ninety-seven percent of you in some fashion. Only three percent said you're actively discouraging it. So. That means that we need to get ready for that. Now, all of you have been working very hard to make your technology stack AI ready. I get it, it's not easy. There is a whole lot of things to do. Data needs to be AI ready. Your apps need to be AI enhanced. Your middle bear has to be strong. Your infrastructure has to support the load. It's not easy. And some of you are just you know in the process of doing it. But now I'm going to ask you to think about: "Do you have a plan for agent readiness?" Your business might be coming up with ideas for agents, and that's okay, that's well and good. But as leaders of technology, we urge you to take a step back and think about what portions of your IT stack will offer the highest points of leverage for you to roll out AI agents. What investments you need to make to get them ready. And also, are there programs that you designed and planned that were done before we all came to know of AI agents, but you're still continuing to do that? Maybe you can stop because you don't want to transform once now based on that old plan and then transform again because you think agents are going to help you. So that might be a place to save money. Now beyond that, as we look to 2030. As all of you mentioned democratization in some form, what does it mean to your technology stack? One enabling your technology stack to support democratization when and where. Also providing business tools, or sandboxes, or enablement, or governance—what are the things necessary? That's worth that should be thought about sooner than later. That's where we see your IT technology stack evolving by 2030. You will start moving from AI readiness to agent readiness and democratization readiness. This is not sequential. Some of you will have to do some of the work sooner. I mean, most of you will have to do some of the work sooner in stages because your business demands it. So the question is, how much democratization does business want to? You know, they want to move more from using it to building it. They do they want to also like you know run it and secure it? As this drops, what do some of you think about the risk that IT might have to handle with? Things are all well and good when things go right, but what if things go wrong? Who's going to get the call? I would bet it'll be somebody in your organization for the most part. So that's something to really think about. What do we want business to own in this area of democratization? Having conversations and laying out an approach. In some of you say that you know what, they are going to split, and identify places where every day democratization is possible. Certain set of things business can do, fine. Certain set of things we are going to hold the line. Business can use it, but we will build it and run it. Thank you very much. For example, things like core banking in banking, and that's okay. So those types of models can lead on to like you know a dual builder type of approach. Now, this we just spoke about this. Another element on the technology stack to consider. You know, we started initially with this example of the bank CIO who wanted to build their own enterprise software. Our answer to them is that it's not as simple as AI replacing your software. Will AI and AI agents impact the enterprise software build versus buy landscape? Absolutely. And you can be very strategic about it. So if you look at software, some are highly like you know business differentiating, and some are not. You can talk to your business partners to identify, and you know whether some software is highly technically complex to build or not. If a software is simple, not very technically complex, there is no big business differentiation, then clearly that's a good candidate for replacing with custom AI or even finding a new AI-native vendor who might be using AI secret sauce or use agent coding to offer you a different value proposition. In this case, it's not worth investing too much in embedded AI. But in some cases, you may find that actually this is a huge competitive differentiator. But that technology itself is no complex. Oh, that's risky. What can you do to invest in that with AI, or like you know, finding other vendors to really strengthen your position so you are not at risk. In some areas, what you might see is it's very complex for me to build an AI to like you know to do. The competitive differentiation is not as much, so I'm not going to replace it. I'm going to add more AI to it. And the very last is areas which are really technically complex, high competitive differentiation. What can you do even more? With a strategic investment to exploit that further. So if I remove the thing in the middle, what I would urge is: look at your technology stack. Where if you plot your key applications, where would they fall? And based on that, you can start building a nuanced strategy for your software stack for 2030. So, we saw build versus buy. I gave you that example, and I have been talking to a lot of CIOs about this. But I'm curious on your take. Because of AI-based coding, and the capabilities that you're building, and because of other reasons, whether you like your relationship with your vendors, are you considering changing your posture for 2030? Do you expect more build or more buy? So here is the our last survey. Thanks, Robert, for kicking that in. So I, the option one is you thinking you're going to significantly do more by versus build in the future. Option two is somewhat more by. Option three is now our build by mix is going to be approximately the same, and then like you know leaning more on the build angle. So think about your software landscape primarily. I'm not talking services, this is all about software, and it's about the mix. It's the shift in the mix. You might increase both, but the shift in the mix is what we are trying to identify here. You can take a few, you know, another thirty forty seconds. Absolutely, thank you so much, Rajesh. Um, yes, again, poll is not open. So click on your response in your screen and then click submit. And then once the poll is closed, we'll display those results for everyone to see. And with the about ten minutes we have left after this, when we wrap up, we will be answering your questions. All right, looks like polls results are still coming in pretty strong right now. So, won't close the poll just yet, but we are seeing number four somewhat more build in the lead with about thirty five percent, and then followed up by no significant change to our current mix now about twenty seven percent there. Let's give them twenty twenty more seconds and let me know when it tickles. Alright, thanks. Close the poll right now. Looks like we stopped. There's results. Yes, yeah. So here we go. Yeah, so it's a. So, yeah, please go ahead. So looks like again, somewhat more build thirty six percent, followed by no significant change to our current mix at twenty six, and then somewhat more buy at nineteen percent, significantly more build at ten percent, and then, sorry, significantly more build at ten percent and a significantly more buy at ten percent. So. Five in one tied at the bottom there. Yeah, so as we can see, it leans more towards build. The the significantly more build and significantly more buy cancel each other out. The last two options, and around a quarter don't expect a change. So it's really among the the rest of the fifty five. It very much skewed towards somewhat more build compared to somewhat more buy. That lines with what we are seeing. Of course, building more has its own set of challenges. The question is, as you think about ID twenty thirty. If we think it's going to be more built, are you gearing up your organizations with investment in software engineering tools across SDLC with AI to really uncover the efficiencies for you to achieve that? And here we started identifying which areas are you going to build more, and that areas could be areas of competitive advantage for you, not commoditization. And how are you managing that? How are you going to manage the shift towards more build? Is something to consider. Thank you for participating. So if we go back to the presentation, so that's the last part. So what do we see when that occurs? When that occurs, you know if you look at the slide, this shows a simple representation of how an application is laid out, right? Or a technology solution. You got user interface at the top, systems of record at the bottom. So, this is how it used to be, in the sense that most of the things we buy now with AI, we were doing little bit things at the top. In fact, one of the CIOs we spoke with told us this, and he's the CEO of one of the largest companies in the world. He said they are fundamentally thinking about giving away all the UI building to business. IT won't manage it anymore. Business will directly take care of you. I knock yourself out. We are good there. In AI agents, we are starting to see this line go down. With AI agents, now with workflow and business, largely could be done with AI agents. So, to what level, for which business capability, that needs to be thought about. That'll help you when you say you're going to do more building, where and what is the mix, what business is going to do, all that. So when you do that, that leads on to new questions. Instead of buying an entire package software top to bottom, do you need to start negotiating with your vendors to buy headless applications or unpacked software? They're not going to like it. I can tell you right now, they want to go move up and up and sell you more AI agents. In fact, I'll give you a little anecdote. I recently asked a group of people in a conference: "How many of you have not been approached by your enterprise vendor to sell you AI agents? Show off hands." Most of the people raised hands. But one person in the front asked me, "Today, that is, they have been reaching them so much every day. He's getting calls from enterprise vendors." So, our suggestion is, think about signing long-term contracts, especially in places that can be impacted by AI. So this is our final thing: assess your IT stack readiness for AI agent readiness, and democratization. So as we come to the end. We looked at what is possible, thinking about an in-state for IT because of AI. We looked at changes to your people, the speed, and lastly the technology stack. Hopefully, that enable you to think about the importance of identifying a deliberate. Plan for IT to transform itself with AI. We share these archetypes. Most of you have an idea where you want to be. Do people in your organization share that? Is it worth talking to them to identifying a deliberate plan so you can use that for all the other decisions to come? And we believe that it will. We believe having a deliberate plan and transforming IT is the single biggest thing that IT can do to transform your business for the AI era. Thank you for your time, and making time this morning or this evening, wherever you are. We have another three four minutes for the final questions. I will turn it back to Robert. Excellent. Yes, thank you so much, Rajesh, for sharing your insights. And to our audience, we will get to some Q and A now. So, with a few minutes we have left, maybe answer a couple questions. Um. First questions we have here: Are there any, sorry, are there emerging design or architectural patterns, that we can leverage to improve agent output quality to ensure we get the right get it right in high risk use cases. There are evaluation patterns and guardrails around those patterns. It's not as mature as the development areas in AI agent. We wish those those areas are much more. Unfortunately, we can't get into the details of the pattern. We have published a set of patterns around that. So, we consider this: there are some emerging, not as mature. Next question: Can you jump over from today to agent-ready technology stack, skipping the AI-ready technology stack, or even jump to democratization-ready stack? Yes and no. In the sense, first we would urge you to start thinking about them, together, but not fully finalizing. But some element of agent, you know. Democratization is really you want to work on now. Now there are some elements of which they depend on each other. For instance, AI ready data you might still want it for your agent readiness. That's no question. But there are some elements that can proceed independently. For instance, we ask you to think about an agent readiness audit, which areas of your application stack you really know what you want to get ready. For that, you don't necessarily need everything in the AI readiness stack to be laid out. So there is some dependency, but not all. But we wouldn't think about it as a purely sequential either. One last question, maybe, and then. Yes, time horizon for the latest survey is pretty short to fundamentally change mix. I think it's more about trends towards well trend toward, but to do all the necessary things to shift the mix, contracts, organizations, reskilling, etc. At an enterprise level will be tough. I think there will be pockets of major disruption. Do you see areas where you think it will be more disruptive? And I think it'll be front office apps, maybe how we interact with SW. A front office, depending on the nature of the organization, in very customer focus, customer brand focus, it is front office. But there are organizations that are very asset heavy, say oil and gas. It's more in a back office. It depends on the organization. Sorry, we couldn't get to all the questions. Hopefully, we were able to address some. Hopefully, that helped. We have much more research available. Thank you for participating. Let me turn it to Robert. Excellent. Yes, thank you so much, Rajesh. I'm sorry we couldn't get all your questions, but please reach out to your Gartner representative with that. Us and then we'll try our best to get those answered. Again, thank you so much to all of you for your attendance. Before you go, we've included some additional resources at the bottom of the page, far bottom of the page. Quick reminder: this webinar is being recorded, so you can watch this presentation again. And get more great insights on demand at Gartner.com/webinars. And lastly, we ask you to please rate this webinar below on the bottom right below the video player. To submit your rating, click the rate session below. Click the rate session button. A box will open up. You select one to five hearts. Please note that five hearts is the top rating. Share your feedback on the insights provided and leave for the feedback box. And then click send. Again, I'd like to thank our presenter, Rajesh, and of course thank you for joining us. Have a great day. Goodbye.
