Frances Karamouzis Gartner AI FinOps use case CIO CFO. Hello and welcome to this Gartner webinar: Gartner's guide to identifying top AI use cases, funding, and measuring value. Your task with driving stronger performance on your organization's mission critical priorities. To do that, you need trusted guidance that provides clarity, not just information. At Gartner, we deliver that clarity by combining forward-looking insights from our 2,500 experts with rigorous proprietary research methodologies. Our perspective is uniquely informed by our hands-on work with five hundred thousand client interactions across every major function, geography, industry, and sector. We don't just provide the business and technology insights; we work with you to apply them, equipping your team with practical tools and expert guidance to achieve your goals. So, whether you're new to Gartner or one of our existing clients, today you'll get actionable, objective insights rooted in human intelligence to help you move forward with confidence. I'm Alexis, your moderator for the session. Before we get started, I have a few tips to help enhance your webinar experience. Around the video player, you'll find a variety of ways to interact with the session. We encourage you to participate by clicking the Ask the Speaker box to submit your questions and thoughts throughout this program. You can either submit a question anonymously, or if you choose, your name, title, and company can be visible along with your question. Navigate to the bottom of the page to download additional resources. Throughout the program, you can rate the session and share feedback. To submit your rating, locate the rate session link below the player. A box will open for you to select one to five hearts. Please note that five hearts is the top rating. Share your feedback on the insights provided in the leave further feedback box and click send. This webinar is being recorded. You can watch this presentation again and find more great insights on demand at Gartner.com/webinars. And with that, now I would like to welcome Gartner Distinguished Vice President Analyst Frances Karamouzis. Fran, thank you for joining us, and now I'll turn it over to you. Thank you so much, Alexis, and greetings everyone. I'm excited to be with all of you today to talk about Gartner's guide to identifying top AI use cases, funding, and measuring value. So let's start with the word "top" in the title. There's no such thing as "top" in an absolute sense. "Top" or the best is in the eye of the beholder. I would contend that each of you on this call, and your organizations, likely have a different set of criteria for what they consider top. On Gartner.com and in our public research, we use top when we're measuring something objective like revenue or headcount or a ranking. The top use case might be the one with the highest ROI, but if you're in public sector, you don't measure ROI. You're unlike a private enterprise. In 2025, haven't taken many of these calls, top use cases and or things that you know sort of rose to the top as as highly requested, where clients were really looking for cost savings of over 10, usually somewhere in the double digits, and they needed to be delivered within a time horizon, usually less than one fiscal year. And then of course, we have in the title measuring value. And I'm going to get deep into value creation and how you're going to assess value creation because what also happened in 2025 is lots of clients spent a lot of time assessing the costs but didn't actually assess the value before they decided to fund the use cases, and so hence funding in the title. So first, spending is going to continue unabated. It's still strong, despite lots of fluctuations and challenges across different economies around the world and different regions. Spending on AI will still remain strong. So while there is cost cutting going on, you can take a look here and see one of our data points: 63 percent of boards of directors rank investment in technology and innovation as a top strategy to navigate global uncertainty. Second item there in the middle, top leadership in the organization still has a high level of confidence that betting on AI is a primary driver for growth. Specifically, 72% of CEOs are betting on AI. And finally, if you look now in that last column here, the data that supports you know some of my earlier points or what I touched on on value, it hasn't been delivered. Only 11 percent of CFOs have been able to concretely measure ROI from their AI investments. So this is actually showcasing lots of different things here, and I would bet that if we were actually sitting here a year ago and you were listening to a webinar from Gartner, these results would not be all that different. You would actually see a lot of zealous enthusiasm about spending on AI, what AI can do, and very, very high expectations. But what actually happened in 2025, what actually happened is there was a bit of tunnel vision, and that tunnel vision was very laser focused on the productivity of individual FTEs or employees. What we found in a lot of our research is that productivity, or individual FTE specific productivity, has not led to financial value. Namely, we sort of talk about in published: time saved is not money saved. And here is one data point of the many. I probably have over a dozen slides on my laptop that highlight this same concept, but I chose one here to kind of highlight the point. But we also have a lot of use cases and case studies that showcase this. What you're seeing here on the screen is on the x-axis is the number of hours saved. So sometimes you save an hour for someone, two hours, three hours, up to five hours. But then on the vertical axis, you actually see performance, and this is from the management teams reporting back whether there was delivered. Revenue or cost savings, in other words, that the performance that they were shooting for get delivered, and you can see this is a pretty flat line here. And this denominator here of how many people we polled sixteen hundred over sixteen hundred people. So this is a very consistent trend. We actually have data like this by function. And by industry, that is all showcasing that same thing. The best way to describe this is a quote from one of our clients. And this is a very common sentiment that we're hearing. But this client talks about we have many examples of what he's calling blue money, and those are productivity and efficiencies. But green money, which is in form of direct cost savings or revenue growth, can only come from critical business changes, from changing the process workflow. Now we've done a lot of work on green money and blue money. So let me just dive for a few seconds on what we mean by this. Blue money is often money that has no direct P&L impact. It doesn't flow on to a cost line or a revenue line on your general ledger, and therefore does not flow to an income statement. Some examples of that is when someone says, "Oh, I increased the productivity of X, Y, Z person. This individual FTE saved three hours or five hours," or "We are increasing the net promoter score," or "We increased customer satisfaction." Or the big one that I hear a lot is cost avoidance: we avoided spending this money that we've done in the past, or reducing customer complaints, or somehow engaging employees, increasing their AI literacy, their digital dexterity. Now Gartner isn't saying that these things are not valuable. What we're saying is these things do not flow, to a cost or revenue line on a general ledger, and therefore the CFO isn't able to showcase them on an earnings call. What we mean by green money is, except the exact opposite of that, where the money does flow to a specific cost line or revenue line, and we have many examples of that. I'm going to show you some case studies throughout this presentation, where you looked at things like you've increased the sales conversion rate, you've increased cycle time, you or sorry, decreased cycle time, you've impacted your inventory stock. Or your total units sold, these are often KPIs that reside within a very specific functional leader who's on the hook for some of these deliverables. So Gartner has published, and if you're a Gartner client, I put in the link in the back of the session, but also here, where we've spent a lot of time saying if you've already started your use cases. And you didn't do a value assessment. So what you ended up with was a lot of blue money, as depicted in this illustrative diagram on the left, where. You came up with all these PowerPoint slides. It had bullet points that said we got this value and that value, but then when you started trying to really showcase how they flow, it wasn't working. My colleague Gabriella Vogel has published these great slides here and a lot of narrative behind them of how do you start that journey of trying to shift. Blue money to green money, and she then has kind of highlighted what is the return the investment returns on that. I won't go into that detail, but we wanted to showcase that ongartner.com. If you're a client or become a client, there's a lot of rich data and research that you can access if you've already started. What I'm going to highlight in this presentation is that you need to change your behaviors and change your approach and your financial rigor of highlighting the assessment of your use cases before you actually fund them. But we experienced and showcased in a lot of our interviews what we're calling the AI value gap, and that's really showcasing that dichotomy where many people have invested but haven't gotten the returns, haven't gotten the value creation. And when we start looking at the root cause of this, one of the big conclusions we came to is that yes, there's still elements of AI technology and agentic technology that's nascent. But it hasn't often been the failure of the technology. It's much more of the failure of these three items. The first one, by far, is: Can your teams and your functional leaders not only identify but translate and communicate what really are the sources of value creation? In other words, how do you delineate value and how do you make that transparent? Instead, what's actually happened is many people have just over-indexed on what appears to be the low-hanging fruit, which is that individual FTE productivity that I talked about. So this notion of distinguishing value and making it transparent is where the struggle really has been. And that age-old sort of, like you know, friction. Let's just say sometimes between two different teams, the IT team or the AI team and the and the business team, not necessarily in alignment or talking the same language. That's actually been one issue in AI. That becomes compounded because you also have data teams that are very involved, you also have security teams that are very involved. The second big root cause is the financial rigor, actually doing a mathematical calculation. Not just a simple sort of, as they say in the US, a back of the envelope calculation. And when I talk about governance in this slide, I'm talking about financial governance, enforcing whatever framework or rules that you have for how are we going to vet, how are we going to prioritize, and then how are we going to decide what we're going to fund based on a certain limits test. And I'll show you that in more detail. But what's actually happened is that's caused a lot of lack of quantifying value at all, and just using slideware. It's also resulted in poor cost estimates, and as we moved from people doing generative AI to agentic AI, what's actually happened is there's a whole different way to calculate cost of agentic, and that's even harder than gen AI. Gartner has two different cost calculators: one for AI and generative AI, and one for agentic. That's how complicated it is. We had to create a new cost calculator. And then there's an inconsistent funding approach because lots of different teams have money. Not all the money is flowing like it used to potentially, where we decide what we're going to fund, and the money moves into the budget of the CIO. And then the CIO is responsible for the projects and funding the projects. No, that's not what's happening. If the head of sales, the head of marketing, the head of supply chain, the head of finance, if all of these different people have their own budgets, they are going out and funding AI initiatives, and they're not using not everybody's using the same consistent financial rigor. And then finally, process change, and that was the big highlight of the quote from our clients and many of our clients that are talking about. The shift is not really about the failure of technology, but the fact that the ownership of the business transition, changing the process workflows, changing the metrics of the humans that do those processes, engendering trust. Looking at the operating model, all of those things are the things that the business team is supposed to be doing, while the IT and the data team are busy developing and testing the solutions. That's actually not happening. So there's been a fairly poor time horizon assessment of when all of this stuff is going to come to fruition, and therefore we're going to get the benefits. So those are some of the core root causes. What has it led to in 2025? Clearly, there has no been R or return, if you will, in the ROI. So there's been a lot of investment and and very limited results on value. Likely over 80 percent of clients are reporting that they invest a lot and haven't gotten value creation. That needs to change in 2026. Now here is the data that supports all of those things I highlighted. We very specifically and clearly asked, "What were the primary reasons your organization did not get financial value from your AI investments?" And we allowed clients to actually pick more than one because they had more than one issue. And you notice selecting the right use cases was number one on the list. I'm actually going to touch upon several of these. I'm going to touch on number one, number two, value assessment, number four, and number five are the big highlights. And you notice I skipped over data. Data is a very big issue for many clients. We actually have a team of 25 analysts at Gartner that solely focus on data. I am not one of them. We do have a number of presentations, but data is indeed one thing that can swing the costs by very large margins. The data cleanup, the data hygiene, the data curation, the storage of the data, integrating the data—so that's a whole big topic, and I don't mean to overlook it. But I want to focus on some of the things that we can actually get done with some of our Gartner frameworks, our Gartner guide to doing this. And here is more information that's highlighting the very low confidence level in the people that are looking at this in measuring the benefits. We specifically asked, "Where were you?" And this is actually showcasing that sixty-three percent of clients today either have no or low confidence in their ability to measure the benefits. And that's why one big thing I'm going to go over in this session is a value calculator. I'm going to showcase both the value side and the cost side. So here I actually ask about the cost as well. This is a little bit better. The reason that this tends to cause you know issues for clients is that point that I talked about earlier, where calculating cost for AI and Gen AI is very different than calculating cost for agentic AI. And so we do have a lot of research coming up, and we do have webinars coming up on just the cost and value of a Genetic AI. So I'm not going to go into that detail. So I gave you a big backdrop. The real question is, what do I do about it? To Alexis's point, how do we make this applied research? How do we give you the tools to make this work? It starts with the premise. This whole rest of this presentation. The premise is that you and your organization are going to implement a rigorous, repeatable, enterprise-wide framework for funding AI. Now, enterprise wide means that it's going to be consistent amongst all those groups. That doesn't necessarily mean that only one person approves everything. You could have multiple approaches to who's doing the approving, but they're using the same rigorous, repeatable framework. And here's where it starts. We affectionately call this the funding funnel. You can name it anything you like. You can draw a different graphic, but the fundamental premise is that there's no shortage of ideas. There's hundreds of ideas. But we can only fund a very small finite number of ideas, and so we need to consistently vet them. Every idea needs to be vetted. We need to prioritize them, meaning juxtapose them against each other, especially if they're disparate ideas. If they're coming from a lot of different groups, you know one from finance, one from HR, one from supply chain. There's a lot of different groups and functions, and they all want to submit their ideas and they want to get them funded. And then what you're going to do is you're going to develop your Litmus test for your enterprise. And this is where I highlighted in the very first slide: your Litmus test is got to be based on your business strategy. If you had a business strategy and your CEO has come out and said the three pillars of our strategy: number one is cost cutting, number two is XYZ, whatever it happens to be, you almost have to tag any use case that you fund to one or more of your business strategy pillars. That has been sorely lacking with many of our clients, but developing this litmus test is a place where Gartner can help you. But the reality is is that this is not a one size fits all. This is very specific to each organization, and it needs to be again reinforced every single time. We can say, well, this use case is an exception, and you need to then showcase. Now there might be some use cases that you say, we're willing to go in a longer time horizon. Or we're willing to get less ROI or less cost cutting, but they all need to fit into a portfolio and they all need to be transparent and communicated upfront. What is the value creation expected and estimated, and what is the associated cost? Not just the first year cost, but the recurring cost. So here's how the framework works. There's two axes: there's the feasibility axis and the business value axis. What you're going to do is array all those ideas, and now you're going to go through and mathematically calculate what is the feasibility and what is the business value creation expected. You're going to end up with, and this is an illustrative graphic, is a very generic example. I put a few dots on there so that you can start to recognize what a use case might look like. So customer profiling or cross-selling, upselling. These are obviously very different in each industry, and they're not necessarily plotted the same way for every client. And I'll show you an example. If you look at asset predictive maintenance. I'm going to show you a couple of examples of asset predictive maintenance in four different industries, and they plotted them in different places. Why? Because in some organizations, if you look at something like feasibility, and we go back to that point about data, in one organization they might have done a phenomenal job over the last couple of years in investing in their data. And therefore, their feasibility score might end up, you know, directionally being on the higher end of the scale. Then we have a lot of other clients that say, "Everybody wants data, but no one wants to pay for the data." So we actually haven't invested a lot in our data fabric over the last five years, and it's an enormous task. To clean up all our data, to create the metadata, to understand how on a regular basis we're going to curate the data. So their feasibility score, which is one of the variables, feasibility, might actually be lower for the same exact use case. So, if you go on Gartner.com, and again we invite you to be a client and to check this out. What we've done is we've taken all the use cases that the Gartner analysts have actually scored, which I'm going to show you in a second. We have over six hundred use cases in this tool. It's an interactive tool, and what I did on the right hand side of the screen is I took a screenshot of and it doesn't all fit on the screen of all the industries that you can actually get these use cases, and we've done it by business function. So if you click on this link and it's also in the recommended reading at the end, you can pick your industry and you can pick multiple industries or multiple you know functions. Once you pick them, so this is what you'll often see in the left rail as you look at this tool when you go on garner.com. And it will generate something like this. I realize it's not visible. I'm highlighting to you the fact that even in this one industry, as an example for manufacturing, you could get product lifecycle manufacturing, you could get design and engineering in manufacturing, you could get manufacturing operations. And what is actually these were created by the analysts who are experts in these areas, and they've taken the top twenty or twenty five use cases that they hear over and over again in our client increase. And the analysts have scored them, and that's what they published. And you could get that from the interactive tool. So you can create your own. By picking selectively the use cases, or you can download the entire one. This one is from software development and testing. I'm not going to go over these. I just want to showcase to you how rich this is and how many different ones you can get. So I showed you the manufacturing. Here's two functions, software and infrastructure that are in IT, and then of course here's the HR function. So you can see our HR team has gone deep, not just the overall HR, but into the different areas of talent management, talent acquisition, learning. So there's lots and lots that you could do. What I did before this webinar is I went to this screen to show you what it looks like on Gartner.com, and I typed in predictive maintenance. And as you can see on the right hand side of the screen, you'll see four areas of predictive maintenance. I think there's a few more down below, but nevertheless you'll see one of these is for governance, government sorry, one is for transportation. They're for different industries. So as you can see, when you double-click on it, the screenshot that you'll get is you'll actually see predictive maintenance. You see in the upper left, right below the words predictive maintenance. You see the three expert analysts who actually did this work. You could actually see their value and feasibility, waitings, and some of their areas, and then what the score was, and then you could even further double click and actually read the narrative of why they scored it. And then of course, if you're a client, you could then you know actually request an inquiry to speak to that analyst, and you could you know healthy debate with the analyst and say, "I can't believe you scored preventive maintenance like this or like that." There's no way that we can do it you know at that level. And so you can really get the color commentary, the insight of how you're going to apply this work. So, yeah, doing that. What I wanted to highlight as you look at creating your matrix, you can use those resources. You can add your own use cases that might be very specific to your organization, to your industry, to your function. But what I will highlight is that there isn't one person who's doing this in your organization. It's actually a multidisciplinary team sport. There's actually two teams that need to be formulated to do this work. The technology or digital leaders I'll call them, which include people from IT, people from data, people from security, people from Enterprise Risk, and even people from finance and procurement and HR. The procurement people are really important because they are also going to get involved because they should be tracking the cost and the pricing of different vendors. So they need to inculcate that variable, and I can tell you in many areas of both Gen AI and A Gentic AI that many many vendors in the market have changed their not just their price but changed the schema of how they price. Three or four times in a given year, because for those of you who are following the industry, there are many vendors that aren't making money—they're not profitable yet—and so they're looking for their own break-even point. So they're actually changing the schemas. So you actually have to be really, really proficient at assembling the different disciplines to score the feasibility. And then, on the other hand, you also need to get the business teams—not the IT teams, not the data teams—but the business teams need to score the vertical axis because they are the ones that can tell you what's the minimum scope and scale that we need to get this value. What are the specific KPIs we need to focus on? And while they're doing this scoring. They need to digest kind of and understand in their hearts, in their minds, and in their guts that essentially the business people are responsible. For all of those things I talked about—changing the workflow, changing the operating model, changing the metrics of the humans that do this work. So while the IT team, the data team, the security team are working on developing the solution, testing the solution, they're responsible for the quality and the workmanship and the on-time and on-budget delivery of the solution, and they're going to tell you the time horizon. The technical risks and the cost of doing this, in the feasibility analysis, and the business people are really going to say, "What is it going to take?" and creating that transparency and that delineation of value that I talked about earlier. So here I just took some of the feasibility variables that you could use and just showed them to you on a slide, so you can start to get a sense of what we're talking about. It's not just starting from left to right in those blue boxes. The software maturity, the platform maturity, the vendor ecosystem—where are they? In are they a startup or what's actually happening? What are the skills, the intellectual property, the methods, the processes that we have in our IT teams and our data teams to deliver this solution? How feasible is that? What's our level of technical debt? The AI-ready data. Gartner has an entire framework for what are the 18 variables that constitute AI-ready data. The security aspects, compliance, and regulatory, and then what is it really going to take? What's the feasibility of governing this after it goes into production? Similarly, you can now showcase and array which feasibility factors you want. You can weight them, and then of course you'll score them. And very important, you want to highlight that auditorial of why you scored them a certain way, and then pass that on to the team that's going to do the work, and pass it on to your lawyers, so that every place you scored a vendor or a specific area pretty low. The people who are managing the project and responsible for executing, they understand that. And if you have a vendor that says, "No, no, no, there's no way I'm a five or a six on this category," your lawyer can actually tell them then you will have no problem putting in a clause to manage and meet or exceed that criteria in your contract. So there's a lot of good value that you get from the process that you're going to carry through all the way through to execution. And then the same kind of thing here. I highlighted for you what are the bigger variables that the business leaders are going to look at. They need to take these variables and translate them into value. So they're going to look at things like customer centricity. They're going to look at like what's the change in the business process, what is the change or the delta in the talent. Who do we need to upskill and reskill from our humans? What are going to be the new metrics? They need to look at all of these things. And in our value calculator, we connect these things to KPIs that again go to a cost line or a revenue line on your general ledger and therefore on your P L. So, for every single idea or use case that you're looking at, you're fundamentally behind the scenes looking at assessing and calculating the cost, calculating the value. And if if you are a public company, you're sorry if you are a private entity, and you're listed on the stock exchange, you also want to likely calculate more specifically ROI, and of course assess risk. And so we've done that. We've taken all these tools that I'm talking about. And this session isn't designed to go deep in every single tool, but we're looking at our cost calculator and looking at our value calculator. What we did, and this research was led by my colleague Rita Salam, and included about 15 analysts myself and others. And you'll see the URL link on the bottom. Where we took the 15 most common use cases and we actually calculated the cost, the initial cost, the recurring cost, and we also calculated the value creation over a three-year period. So Gartner uses this more portfolio framework, the Defend Extend Up End, which I'll explain in a few minutes. But essentially, these are most common things. So when you open this research, you will get an Excel spreadsheet with 15 tabs because there's 15 items here. So when you look at something like Gen AI assisted customer support, the one I'm gonna I chose to kind of double click on for this session, you'll see two tabs: one is a buy and one is a build. And what you'll see in that spreadsheet is the whole audit trail of how we got this information. I won't go through all of the detail, but the main things you'll see highlighted in the spreadsheet are what I. Pulled out and showcased here. You'll see on the left here what is the initial first year cost, including everything not what you're just gonna pay to the vendor, but what you're gonna pay for the rollout, for the training, for the deployment, for the integration, and all of that, and then what's the recurring cost. In this case, I chose to show it by user per user. We do have the aggregate as well, and then on the on the far right. You see the value side of it, and here it says per agent. This actually really means call center agent in this case. So this data a lot of this data comes from real clients. And what's underneath it is the underlying KPIs that we use, and it'll show you the metrics in the spreadsheet. But we did this for all these use cases, and we've published the low range, the high range, and just an easy, quick way that you could take that information and showcase it in your presentation to your leadership. So you'll see on the far right is the cumulative cash flow, cumulative sorry value line, that is in the blue, and the cumulative cost line that's in the orange, and where the break even point is. So it's available for every one of these, but you'll notice that the break even line is different for every one of them. And I also want to highlight it's going to be different for you. This is not meant to just be copied. This is meant for you to learn because your use case is going to be a little different. Your data is going to be a little different. Your KPI is going to be different. Your vendor that you might be using is different from this particular client. But this is really trying to sort of teach you how to do this and apply the research. And you'll notice in this example, this client actually chose to do this where the cost line exceeds the value line. So they were not looking for specific ROI. They felt that they needed to get this important insight into what's happening in their sales cycle. So this particular leader had budget and was willing. You know, to make this investment, and when we were having the conversation with this person, he said, "I'm going to bend that value line. It's not going to look like that in three years. We're going to really change our processes, and this AI solution is really going to give us a different way of work." So it's quite interesting how people are looking at this. So there isn't again one top or one single way. To look at it, but I just wanted to just flip through all of these to sort of show you that all of this is available for you on Gartner.com. And one of the things we highlight is when you sometimes what is the threshold of the number of users that you need, where maybe a build makes more sense than a buy. So that's why in this particular case I showed you the slides of the buy scenario and the build scenario. So all of this now leads to case studies. So what I've been talking about so far are use cases. Those are the ideas and the things that we are contemplating we might do. But Gartner also has a lot of case studies of what clients actually did, and what we did is exactly the same thinking, same methodology that we wanted to follow through, where we took every single example and said. What? How does this correlate to a revenue growth area or a cost savings area? And so we found use cases or sorry case studies for each one of these as as examples. And if you a reminder, if you followed this and you went on Gartner dot com and you did the use cases, you could do the next part of the follow through, which is drill down and find a case study. So you say, "Well, I'm thinking about this use case. Here's how I scored it," and you can find on Gartner.com a completed case study of that example. And of course, since this isn't legible, since this is a screenshot, I actually created some nice slides for you to show two three examples. This is a cost reduction example where and these were all accumulated and documented and captured by two of our data analytics analysts, Aura Papo, sorry, and also Carly Eodin, and they not only did these or captured these, they also behind the scenes said. They did a whole analysis on what is the right way to simulate data. Which technique of data simulation do you need in order to achieve these results? And so they interviewed and looked at these clients. This particular client was a logistics provider, and they were really focused on that last mile effort and targeting a twenty percent increase in on-time deliveries, and capping you know their fleet growth to under five percent. And you could see the outcomes that they achieved. I'm not going to go through all of these in detail. The reason I included them in this deck is to showcase for you that the outcomes all are related to a KPI that flows to a general ledger line item. In this case, most of them are related to costs. They're all about cost drivers. I also included one that is much more about revenue growth. This is a multinational DIY and home improvement goods company, and they were targeting a ten percent annual revenue growth while maintaining you know a balanced inventory and production. You know, so to avoid you know sort of persistent overstock. And again, if you look on the right and you sort of see what they did and what results they got, all of these case studies are on Gartner dot com that you can dive you know deeper into. And then because I didn't want to exclude some of people of our client base, there are people who don't only focus on growth, and that are public sector clients. So this is an example of a hospital. Where they were actually looking at this regional healthcare network, you know, was looking at average, you know, emergency department wait times, and so here they're dealing with a very different KPI, obviously related to health and treatment and outcomes related to patients and lives. So it's a whole other level of value. But I just wanted to showcase to you that value again, or top or best, is really in the eye of the beholder. So when you look at all these use cases, they all need to link back to again something that's going to grow your revenue or drive cost savings. And you know when you ask or work with your business people, what you're going to find is they know what the KPIs are. The question is, is can they articulate what are the underlying elements that delineate value? They might have 500 steps in a process. Ah, fifty of them might be repeatable commodity steps that everybody in your industry does, but there are targeted things in those tasks and those processes that actually are the make-or-break or the differentiator of value, and so. When we do that, as you assess your use cases, you're going to find that they fall into these three buckets. And we use this as a way to communicate and have a discussion with the CFO, the Chief Financial Officer. So you're going to have some use cases that are going to be what we call the Fend. Those are use cases that give you competitive parity. They're going to give you some marginal incremental gains. They're going to give you some micro innovations. These are often use cases that sometimes don't have any ROI or very little ROI. A lot of the things in the digital workplace or what we call at Gartner everyday AI fall into this category. As a general rule, and this is not hard and fast, but as a general rule, because these are not giving you ROI, what we often see is a small percentage. Those percentages on the bottom are the percentage of your budget or the percentage of the number of use cases that you approve. You might want to have a cap on it at somewhere between five and fifteen percent. Let's just say ten percent. And in the middle, you're going to have things that are going to give you the highest ROI. They're going to either help you grow in your market size, your market reach, your revenue. They're going to decrease cost and therefore increase profitability. These are the ones that are going to give you competitive advantage. So you might want to have a big lion share of your use cases, or eighty percent fall into this category. And then finally, you might have some game-changing ones. These are the ones that often have that big time horizon. They often traverse one fiscal year. Not everybody has the wherewithal to do that or the patience, and so maybe they introduce these later, not in the first round of their funding approvals. But depending on where you are, you might want to choose one or two of these, and again a small percentage of your budget, somewhere between five and fifteen percent. If you want to be a disruptor in your industry, we've seen clients have this number be at fifty percent because they want to be AI first, AI everywhere. They want to be the bleeding edge in their organization. We find that most clients who are sort of middle of the road and want to be more of a fast follower, they're really focused on the ones that are not going to disintermediate them. There is no right or wrong of these percentages. It's just important that in your litmus test, you have your caps of where every time you approve a use case, you're tagging it to one of these to sort of then report to your CFO how many use cases and what percentage of your budget you're using for them. And the reason for all of this. Other than your CFO, is you need to manage these differently. When you think about these from a cost side, the defend ones you're gonna manage like a cost center, the extend ones you're gonna manage like a profit center, and the up end ones you're gonna manage like a VC. One in twenty of these is gonna be successful, so very many of them are not gonna end up going into production. So you're doing this for the value side, which we sort of highlight this way. The value side of that up end is the return on your future. You're doing all of these things to learn about AGENTING, to learn about algorithms, to learn how these tools and these technologies behaving and what you need to do. So it's kind of return on your future. As opposed to starting from the left here, return on employee because these don't get a lot of ROI. We call it return on employee because this is all about employee empowerment. You're often increasing the AI literacy. You're increasing the digital dexterity of your folks. You're empowering the individual employees, and in the middle is where you're going to get the big ROI. So you want to think about it in this portfolio, and actually, as you're approving use cases, you are accumulating your group. So now I leave you with, what is different about all of this? In the old days, what we used to do is do design, build, run very sequentially. And in advance, what we would do is we would do a business case. This old school methodology is actually no longer working. It doesn't work in AI. And if you notice, one difference is the business case is kind of done once, and you present it to leadership, and then leadership asks you tons and tons of questions. They really dig deep, they give you a hard time. But then once they approve it, they then say, "Okay, you're off to the races. Go, go off and design, build, run, and do it." What's really happening in AI is a very different approach. It's dynamic, it's iterative, and you actually have to go to management and have some discussions maybe as many as five times because what this actually looking from starting from that bullseye in the center. P O B stands for proof of value. That is what you're doing in this entire methodology that I highlighted. You're looking at each use case, looking at the feasibility, you're looking at the business value, and on paper it actually looks good. So you're gonna fund it. And it meets your litmus test and your threshold. And then you're going to do a POC, a proof of concept. At the end of that proof of concept, you are going to revisit your cost calculation and revisit your value creation assumptions, because now you learned from the POC. And you're going to make a no-go or a go or no-go decision: Do we move forward, or do we actually table this and we're not doing it because it's going to be a black hole of spending, or it's not going to deliver the value that we thought? Um, and you don't want to end up in what our has now affectionately been called POC purgatory. We have clients who started hundreds of POCs and they're all sitting out there. Very little has made it into production. In fact, more than 60 percent have not made it into production. That's a big problem because you're just spending, spending, spending and you're not getting any results. If you choose to move forward, you will now do a pilot. And again, at the end of the pilot, you've learned more, and what you're doing is revisiting your cost, revisiting your value creation, and then you're going to go forward and execute. Unfortunately, you're still not done because in AI, in generative AI, in agentic AI, you're not sure if you can scale this. So you're often going to go through this usually twice, two iterations, to feel really comfortable as you're doing it. And as you do it more and more, this becomes a high, a very fast cycle time, and it becomes second nature. So with that, I will highlight the final sort of words of wisdom here: that there's really two groups of people doing this work, the business leaders who are responsible for the value creation. Um, through AI and the behavior changes of the humans and the decision makers and how we're doing the work, um, they're responsible for driving the competitive advantage. The technology leaders are responsible again for the workmanship, the quality, the on-time delivery of the solutions. So they're responsible for the technology, the data, the software, the infrastructure and operations, and of course the cyber safeguards. I didn't talk a lot about security in this session, but obviously we all know how excuse me how important that is. So they're managing the primary costs and by extension many of the technology risks. So with that, I will highlight that value transparency is what's really happening on the business side. There's a forced way of truly delineating value, and on the technology side, we're seeing more opacity. You can no longer look at those ten million lines of code. You're doing more of a black box. So there's a lot more work that needs to be done upfront. So we have some time for questions now. There's been a lot coming in. Please keep them coming in and ask the speaker box. As a reminder, you can also rate this session at the link below the player. Five hearts is the top rating, or you can submit your feedback on the Insights today in the leave for their feedback box. Before we get to Q and A, here are some resources to take you deeper into the topic of AI. The insights you've heard today are just a glimpse of the clear objective guidance Gartner provides to help AI leaders drive real business impact. Gartner's solution for AI leaders brings together forward-looking insights, interactive tools, peer experiences, and executive-level guidance from seasoned experts, equipping you to develop and execute an AI strategy, set strong foundations, scale use cases, shape your tech stack, and measure results. You'll also get role-specific benchmarks, best practices, and tailored insights. Plus, ask Gartner, our AI-powered tool to tap trusted expertise instantly. To learn more, follow the link on this slide or connect with your Gartner representative on how we can help your team accelerate its impact. Join us also at a Gartner conference to hear from top experts, network with fellow AI leaders, and get a personalized tour of the latest insights and tools at the Gartner Showcase. Gartner clients, please connect with your client services associate to find and register for the best events for your role. And here you can find a slide with recommended research that was hand selected by Frances Karamouzis. If you are not yet a Gartner client, please contact a Gartner representative to find out how you can access material like this and more. And make sure to follow us on social media to get daily updates and insights to help you lead a faster, better, smarter AI organization. You can download these resources from the bottom of the page. Plus, you can get more Gartner insights, access additional resources, and see upcoming and on-demand webinars at gartner.com/webinars. Please reach out to your Gartner representative to take advantage of these benefits and maximize your Gartner relationship. Okay, with all of that, Fran, I am going to hand it back over to you to start answering some of these questions. Great, fantastic. So let me start with the most voted question here. Someone asked, "Where do you see the most value for AI in IT operations for the business?" And I think there were nineteen people who also said, "I have that same question." Essentially, first of all, I'll just preface my response by saying, "I'm not an infrastructure and operations analyst." One of the slides that I showed you showed IT Service Desk, so that showed kind of where our analysts are seeing the highest value and highest feasibility ones. Reading off of that, things like endpoint anomaly responses on there, intelligent categorization, all of those things, incidents. What I will tell you is that in my interviews with clients, I have met a handful of clients, not a ton because I'm not in infrastructure operations, but I did meet a client recently two weeks ago that got their level one support almost. To less than ten humans doing it, from hundreds, and so they have a lot of. AI that they implemented for primarily level one, and I do have another client that I met that reduced their costs to deliver certain areas—not the entire infrastructure operations, but very specific areas of infrastructure operations by 75 percent. So there are those are, I think a smaller set of clients at least that I've seen. But what I the reason I highlighted them is because they are possible. So I will tell you that we have over a hundred analysts in our infrastructure and operations group because infrastructure and operations still is over something like seventy percent of a CIO's budget. And therefore, that is a big bastion of area where lots of savings, cost savings, are can be found. So hopefully, that's a glimpse of an answer. But I would invite you, especially if you're a client or want to become a client of Gartner, the rich depth that we have in our infrastructure and operations group. Ah, second question was about ROI. It's kind of a long question. I'm going to read the primary sort of part of the question, which is, "Did we agonize over ROI for these advances in technology the same way we're agonizing over AI?" It's sort of interesting because when you talk to clients who've been in the industry for 20 years. One of the things they talk about when and and you're using the term agonized, but one of the things that they're talking about is when we used to approve big projects like in the past we did that big SAP initiative that was a million or ten million or I've seen initiatives that were over one hundred million dollars all in. When you're paying for the product, you're paying for the consulting firm, you're paying for all of this stuff. Um, and you're reorganizing your processes, or the Oracle project, or the ServiceNow, or the Salesforce project. Um, they would take the bigger projects and they would do this kind of rigor. The reality is: why you need to implement this for AI is because all of the AI projects start to get into the millions of dollars eventually, not hundreds of thousands, but even for small you know organizations whose scope is is finite, you don't understand how high the numbers are getting. For AI, and that's why when you end up with a CFO that has to get on an earnings call and in the first quarter identify, we're doing all this great stuff for our business using AI in the next couple of quarters. He, she, or they actually have to showcase when are we going to get this ROI, what time frame and how much did we get. One of the projects that we did in our team is we actually downloaded the first six months of all the earnings calls in twenty twenty five, and we're in the process of doing the rest. Where we were looking at in the earnings calls, where we were able to very directly showcase a fairly good either correlation or cause and effect of money you invest in in AI and getting results. And most organizations are on the hook for that, and that's why we're in this place in terms of agonizing over AI. The other component to that is AI is not a technology decision only. AI is a business decision that you're making, and that's the difference. It's traversed into many many areas far beyond you know IT. The next question, and just Alex, just keep me honest so we stay on time here. But if you reduce. Headcount due to implementing AI, is that cost saving green money? Great question. My next webinar by the way is all about the connection between headcount and savings and value creation. So I'm going to get deep into that. But I don't want to leave you hanging. To answer this question, is it depends. I talked to a client, I've talked to actually several banks, and I looked at the process called KYC, which is Know Your Customer. In that process, in many large banks, there are thousands—not hundreds—but thousands of people who touch that process. It could have over 500 steps. Some of them are compliance steps. Others are you know components of you know qualifying the actual customer and things like that. Regardless, every bank is required to do them or versions of them. They're different. It's different in Europe as it is in Asia as it is in the United States and Latin America, but nevertheless, when you're talking about thousands of people. If they eliminated or significantly increased the productivity of ten of those people, or twenty of those, or a hundred, I've seen people do that and not get green money. So the answer is it depends because there are many many examples. It's very dependent on several things: the complexity of the process, the scope of the process. It's also dependent on the tacit knowledge, the knowledge that's in people's heads versus the explicit knowledge that's documented, and the exception-based structures. So sometimes getting rid of these people helps, but it doesn't change the total marginal cost to deliver. And if you don't hit the marginal cost to deliver number, it's not going to flow to green money. So with that, I think we're at time. Alexis, why don't you close us out? Thank you, everyone. All right. Um. So before everyone goes, I just want to send a quick reminder that you can access additional resources at the bottom of this page, or as we noted, go to that ask a speaker chat, ask the speaker chat for the highlighted comment there, for the link to the tool that Frank was talking about today. Please rate this session and share your feedback on the insights provided. And to submit your rating, click ahead here. To submit your rating, you can click Rate Session below the player. A box will open up for you to select one to five hearts. Please note that five hearts is the top rating. You can share your feedback on the insights provided in the leave for the feedback box and click Send. All right, with that, I want again thank Fran and of course, whether you're new to Gartner or an existing client, thank you so much for joining us today. Have a great day.
